Chapter: 1

It is said that Rama performed diina jana rakshana in this Aranya Kaanda, Miserable 
People's Protection and mitra jana rakshana in the next canto Kishkindha Kaanda, 
i.e., Friendly People's Protection. The janasthana is the unexplored area by the then people of aaryavarta, 
where the raakshasa ethnicity prevailed and which certainly resisted any outside influences or culture, and 
which is why they are called raakshasa-s. The word raksha means protection, and 
they protect their own culture and ethnicity, and if any outsiders to join them, they shall be subservient.For 
e.g., Ravana does not tolerate the insult meted out by his sister Shuurpanakha at the hands of Lakshmana.Ravana, 
though persuaded by Maareecha not to encounter Rama, does not listen to any advises but wished to abduct Seetha, 
because he wanted to possess that beautiful woman, like all other beautiful, pompous objects like Kubera's wealth, 
Lanka, the golden city and Pushpaka aircraft etc. Ravana even baits Seetha with queen-hood, if only she subjugates 
to him, and all these dictatorial aspects reveal the pride and vanity of Rakshasa culture. But the term 'demon' 
used in paucity of equivalent term may not be taken to mean just as a wicked demon or a devil, but a powerful 
antagonistic culture or ethnic dominions of Rakshasas, in Janasthana.

Chapter: 2

Viradha the demon confronts Rama and other and tries to abduct Seetha, and
then Rama. The killing of this Viradha is the first act of Rama in eliminating negative
forces in his empire to establish Rama Raajya. This killing is also a gift to Sage
Sharabhanga, whom he meets later, as per the meaning of verse I-1-41 of Samkshepa
Ramayana contained in Bala Kanda. Rama thus started to act freeing the saints and sages
in forests, and the forests themselves, from the cruelties of demons. Viradha is a demon
by curse and a devotee Goddess Lakshmi, now incarnate as Seetha. Hence this demon wanted
to own his goddess and hence lifts Seetha into his hands to abduct her away from Rama.
But Rama and Lakshmana overpower and eliminate him, rescuing not only Seetha, but also
other saints and sages living thereabout.

Chapter: 3

Rama and Lakshmana enter into a dialogue with Viradha, the demon and shower arrows on him. Later, Viradha, the demon carries 
Rama and Lakshmana away from Seetha.

Chapter: 4

Rama and Lakshmana come to know about the curse of Viradha. Viradha desires to die in then hands of Rama according to the 
amendment given by the cursing authority, and thus he will be killed and relieved of his curse by Rama, and his elimination 
of negative forces starts with the elimination of Viradha. At the time of release from his curse, Viradha advises Rama to 
go to Sage Sharabhanga, who can advise Rama properly. It is said whenever a superior being is approached, he shall not be 
neared empty-handedly. So, the elimination of Viradha, first act of Rama to safeguard the diinajana 
parirakshana in Dandaka forests is the gift that Rama takes to the Sage Sharabhanga in next chapter. This is not 
a separate chapter in Baroda edition. But in Gorakhpur and Eastern versions it is a separate one.

Chapter: 5

Rama after killing demon Viradha enters the hermitage of Sage Sharabhanga, as advised by the dying demon Viradha 
in the previous episode. Sage Sharabhanga refuses the invitation of Indra to come to heaven, but awaits the 
arrival of Rama to see him with his own eyes. After seeing Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana, and also showing next 
course of their journey, that Sage enters the yogic fire and ascends to Brahma's abode.

Chapter: 6

After the heavenward journey of Sage Sharabhanga, Rama is approached by
others sages and hermits. They inform him about the atrocities of demons around that
place. They all ask Rama to eradicate the menace and Rama avows to do so, in order to
keep up the tranquillity of those hermitages, and also to obliterate the menace of demons
from earth.

Chapter: 7


Chapter: 8

Rama and others, having spent that night in the hermitage of Sage Suteekshna, start to go from there 
on the next day morning, duly taking permission from the sage. While bidding farewell to Rama and others, 
Sage Suteekshna explains concern about the forests, which are rich natural gifts to human kind and tranquil 
abodes of hermits, and implicitly suggests to Rama, to somehow safeguard them from the demonic activities 
in this Dandaka Aranya, by whom these forests are rendered into graveyards, not even honourable graveyards, 
but stockyards for heaps of dead bodies, bones and skulls, for no faulty reason of the saints and sages.

Chapter: 9

Seetha foresees danger in Rama's decision to eliminate the demons in Dandaka forest, without 
any provocation from their side, at the request of some sages. She narrates an old episode 
about a sage who in possession of a weapon became violent and cruel., 


Chapter: 10

Rama replies Seetha's enquiry as to why he should wage war to eliminate the demons. He says 
that it is only to protect the land from the atrocities of demons, and for safeguarding 
the decrepit sages under his scheme of protecting the helpless.

Chapter: 11

Rama comes across lake from which divine music is heard. Surprised at the musical notes 
from beneath the waters of the lake he enquires with the sage who is following, and that 
sage narrates the episode of Sage Mandakarni. Then Rama proceeds on wondering at that lake, 
and he visits all the hermitages about there and thus elapsed are ten years. Again Rama 
returns to the hermitage of Sage Suteekhsna, and after staying there for some time, takes 
leave of that sage and proceeds to see Sage Agastya. And on the way he visits the brother 
of Sage Agastya also. Rama, on the way narrates about the great deeds done by Sage Agastya 
in protecting humans from demons, and also depicts the propitious nature of Agastya's hermitage.

Chapter: 12

Rama, Lakshmana, and Seetha enter the hermitage of Sage Agastya. Sage Agastya is also waiting 
to receive Rama for along time, and now receives them with all honours, sagaciously perceiving 
Rama as Vishnu incarnate. Sage Agastya gives a divine bow of Vishnu, two quivers with ever 
replenishing with arrows, and a golden sword in a golden sheath to Rama, saying that with 
the very same armoury Vishnu once eradicated evil on earth.

Chapter: 13
Rama requests Sage Agastya to indicate a place in the forest to make a residence
during the days of exile. Sage Agastya foresees the next course of Ramayana, and orients his
conversation around womanhood and Seetha. Then that sage informs Rama to proceed to Panchavati
where Seetha will be delightful of its surroundings.

Chapter: 14

Rama and the other two on their way to Panchavati come into contact with Jatayu, the mighty 
eagle. When Rama questions about its identity, Jatayu narrates the creation of animal species 
along with humans, and informs Rama that he is a friend of King Dasharatha and would like 
to help Rama in exile.

Chapter: 15

Rama entrusts the construction work of a parNa shaala, straw-cottage 
in Panchavati, nearby river Godavari. Lakshmana with all his expertise constructs a cosy 
cottage and they enter it after the ritual of house-entering ceremony. Rama admires Lakshmana 
for his construction work and as a thanksgiving he embraces Lakshmana and expresses his 
heart felt feeling about Lakshmana's concern towards Rama.

Chapter: 16

On one day before the sunrise Rama proceeds to River Godavari for daily bath along with 
Seetha and Lakshmana. On the way looking at the nature around Lakshmana eulogises winter 
season. In doing so he casts aspersions on queen Kaikeyi, and Rama reproves it.

Chapter: 17

Shuurpanakha, the problem demoness of Ramayana enters here. She approaches the cottage of Rama and offers 
her wifehood to Rama. She is the sister of Ravana and her husband Vidyut Jihva was murdered by Ravana 
alone, rendering his own sister a widow. She being an age-old demoness wants Rama to marry her, leaving 
Seetha off.

Chapter: 18

Rama averts Shuurpanakha's advances toward him and asks her to seek Lakshmana instead. Lakshmana 
uses wordplay in retorting her in her own words. But she takes the apparent meaning of Lakshmana's 
words and rushes to eat away Seetha. Lakshmana defaces her and she noisily runs away from 
there, only to report to her brother Khara, a violent demon. This is the triggering situation 
of another round of troubles to Rama and Ramayana.

Chapter: 19

Shuurpanakha narrates her woeful story to her brother Khara ncriminating Seetha in particular. She wants 
Khara to wage a war so that she could drink Seetha's blood. Khara in order to appease his sister sends 
fourteen demons to eliminate Rama.

Chapter: 20

The fourteen demons arrive at Rama's cottage guided by Shuurpanakha and they wage a war with Rama in 
which Rama destructs all their weaponry and eliminates them all. Seeing this defeat Shuurpanakha rushes 
back to her brother to report the defeat.

Chapter: 21

Shuurpanakha comes again to her brother Khara to report that all the fourteen demons sent by him are 
slain by Rama. She persuades him to wage a war against Rama and Lakshmana and annihilate them for they 
intruded into Dandaka and there is every possibility of onslaught by them on demons.

Chapter: 22

Khara, the brother of Shuurpanakha starts out to wage war with Rama with fourteen thousand demons and 
with their unusual arsenal. This is the first major move of demons towards Rama that leads to the ultimate 
battle at the end of epic.

Chapter: 23

On the starting out of Khara's demonic forces to wage a war with Rama, many bad omens are foreboded 
by vultures, animals, and even by nature. Though in the know of the portent evil, Khara proceeds with 
his army vaingloriously messaging his army that he can overcome these auguries or even Indra, and Rama 
is nothing before him.

Chapter: 24

Rama perceives good omens of victory, but to safeguard Seetha he sends her away with Lakshmana to take 
shelter in a mountain's cave till the war is over. Then he adopts a furious nature to annihilate demons. 
Gods and divinities watch from heavens as to how a war can occur between one against fourteen thousand 
demons.

Chapter: 25

The ambidextrous archery of Rama is established here for the first time. So far, he has been using his 
archery sporadically, and here it is said to have a different dimension. The speed with which he draws 
arrows from quiver, the quickness with which he strings them, and the precision with which he shoots, 
is suggested here, though not explained. Though no apparent divinity is attached to this excercise, 
it suggests a divine expertise of a human.

Chapter: 26

Rama eliminates fourteen thousand demons led by Duushana. Firstly, the forerunning demons are killed, 
next Duushana is routed, and then twelve other captains who on knowing Duushana's downfall dashed towards 
Rama. Left behind are only two, Khara and Trishira, the chiefs of that demonic force in Janasthaana.

Chapter: 27

Trishira, the demon, supersedes Khara to fight Rama at his turn. He hits Rama with arrows for which 
Rama says that it is no more than the patting with flowers. Then a combat ensues and Rama becoming infuriated 
eliminates Trishira in the battle.

Chapter: 28

Khara the demon brother of Shuurpanakha confronts Rama when all of his valiant warriors are eliminated. 
He wages a fearful war showing all his expertise and he even brings down the amour of Rama with his 
arrows. The combat of Rama and Khara takes a longer time, as Khara is not easy-to-deal demon.

Chapter: 29

Khara provokes Rama to fight, but Rama gives enough advise to Khara to yield up. Khara presumes that 
Rama is overtired to fight him back and thus enters into verbal fight. Ultimately Khara hurls a mammoth 
mace at Rama, which burns down all the neighbouring plants and bushes, and Rama splinters it down while 
it is still sky rocketing.

Chapter: 30

Rama and Khara exchange a haughty wordy duel and when the demon Khara charges at Rama, Rama eliminates 
him with his all-powerful arrow and gods and sages shower flowery rain. Seetha and Lakshmana return 
from their hiding cave and Seetha becomes very happy on seeing her victorious and indefatigable husband.

Chapter: 31

A spy of Ravana named Akampana rushes to him to break the news of annihilation of Janasthaana 
by Rama. He suggests Ravana to abduct Seetha. Because parting with Seetha causes grief to 
Rama and thereby he dies. On thinking for while, Ravana goes to Mareecha seeking his help 
in abducting Seetha. Mareecha while explaining Rama's capabilities, reminds us of the incarnations 
of Vishnu, and advises Ravana to be content with what he has.

Chapter: 32

The pomp and pageantry of Ravana is portrayed along with his idiosyncrasy and individuality, his triumphs 
and victories, his jalousies and covetousness. Shuurpanakha approaches him to inform of her fate at 
the hand of Lakshmana.

Chapter: 33

Shuurpanakha taunts Ravana for his un-kingly activities, by which his kingdom is going to 
face a calamitous situation soon. While gibing at him she narrates how a king, really fit 
for kingship, shall conduct the affairs of kingdom. She speaks many paradigms on which many 
commentaries are declined basing on kings and their vices.

Chapter: 34

Ravana enquires about Rama's valour and weaponry for which Shuurpanakha narrates about Rama, Seetha, 
and Lakshmana and what has happened in Janasthaana. Thus she prompts Ravana to achieve Seetha as his 
wife, for none surpasses Seetha in her beauty.

Chapter: 35

Ravana proceeds to Maareecha seeking his help in the abduction of Seetha. He travels by his aircraft-like 
chariot and on way he sees many locations along the seacoast that are affluent and divine. On seeing 
a banyan tree Ravana recollects the episode of Garuda, the Divine Eagle. He arrives at the hermitage 
of Maareecha.

Chapter: 36
Ravana seeks Maareecha's help to abduct Seetha. He asks Maareecha to assume the
shape of a golden-deer and lure Seetha, and then Seetha asks Rama and Lakshmana to fetch that
golden-deer. If Rama and Lakshmana are distracted from the hermitage, Ravana can safely abduct
Seetha. Listening to this Maareecha is struck dead, because he is already struck with the arrow of
Rama when he was in Tataka forest. As such, Maareecha tries to explain Ravana about Rama's
quintessence.

Chapter: 37
Maareecha advises Ravana to stay away from Rama with his own unpleasant experience
with Rama's arrow when he was in Tataka forest, and portrays a gruesome picture of Rama to Ravana,
asking him to not to meddle with Rama's affairs.

Chapter: 38
Maareecha continues his good word to Ravana and he dissuades him from abducting
Seetha. His advice is that the dalliance with other's wives is the greatest sin, more so, with
Rama's wife as Rama's valour is irrefutable. Maareecha narrates how Rama hurt him while
safeguarding Vishwamitra's Vedic-ritual, when Rama was still a young boy.

Chapter: 39
Maareecha further advises Ravana to avoid confrontation with Rama for it would be
ruinous to the entire demonic race. He narrates another episode of his misadventure with Rama and
how he escaped from the all-pursuant arrow of Rama.

Chapter: 40
Ravana rebuts Maareecha for giving an unasked advice and details his plan to abduct
Seetha. Ravana intimidates Maareecha that he himself will kill Maareecha immediately if his orders
are disobeyed, and Maareecha may perhaps have no opportunity to die at the hands of Rama.

Chapter: 41
Maareecha dissuades Ravana again and warns him of the fatal consequences if Rama is
irked by the wrongdoings of Ravana. In every utterance, Maareecha repeats that not only Ravana but
the entire demonic race is also going to ruin due to Ravana's impertinence. Finally when Ravana is
heedless of these advises, Maareecha prepares himself to die by the arrow of an enemy, namely Rama,
rather than by his own clansman, Ravana.

Chapter: 42
On travelling by the aircraft like chariot Ravana and Maareecha enter Dandaka forest
and arrive at the threshold of Rama's hermitage. Then at the insistence of Ravana Maareecha assumes
the form of an amazing golden Deer, and Seetha catches a sight of that deer.

Chapter: 43

On spotting the deer Seetha calls Rama and Lakshmana to have sight of it. Lakshmana immediately concludes 
it to be Maareecha, but Seetha, keeping his observation aside asks Rama to fetch it. Rama is also fascinated 
when he looked at that deer and he explains to Lakshmana as to why that particular deer is to be hunted 
down.

Chapter: 44
Rama eliminates Maareecha when he is escaping beyond reach in the form of Golden
Deer. He sports with that deer for a long time and when it is leading him away and afar from the
hermitage, he is vexed with the trickery of the deer and kills it. At the time of his death
Maareecha shouts out for Seetha and Lakshmana, as demanded by Ravana. Rama is perplexed at this
oddity of Maareecha and presumes that some danger is immanent and then returns to hermitage.

Chapter: 45

Seetha rebukes Lakshmana for he is still here, loitering away even after listening Rama's cry for help. 
She goes to the extent of slandering him as having intents to woo her, at the cost of Rama's life. Lakshmana 
tries to pacify her but in vain, as she persists in her rash talk. Lakshmana leaves her alone and starts 
to reach Rama, broken-heartedly.

Chapter: 46

Ravana praises Seetha's beauty by extolling every limb of hers, though he enters like a Brahman sanyaasi, 
a friar. He indulges in a most untoward laudation that is unbefitting for a saintly and elderly almsman. 
Unable to refute him, because he is in such a pious garb, she had to invite him as an untimely guest.

Chapter: 47

The debate of Seetha and Ravana has started, as Ravana wished to woo Seetha. In the first instance Seetha 
believes him to be a Vedic Brahman but insists to know about him. Ravana reveals his identity and asks 
her to become his wife. Thereupon she goes into a frenzied state and brainstorms Ravana in all her curtness.

Chapter: 48

Ravana vaingloriously extols himself and tempts Seetha with all impossible comforts and luxuries, if 
she obliges him and comes to Lanka with him, leaving Rama. She curtly dismisses all his baiting and 
luring.

Chapter: 49

Seetha's abduction takes place now. Ravana forcefully abducts Seetha in his air-chariot. She bewails 
and bemoans for Rama and Lakshmana and appeals to all nature to inform Rama about this abduction. Finally, 
she sees Jatayu, the eagle, and asks him to narrate her abduction to Rama.

Chapter: 50

Jataayu confronts Ravana on hearing the wailing of Seetha. He boldly forestalls Ravana and his air-chariot 
in the sky itself, and as an elderly being he reviles Ravana from the viewpoint of righteousness befitting 
to kings, but of no avail. His dilemma is that he cannot take flight to Rama's place, nor he can forestall 
Ravana until Rama comes. Yet, he persists to affront Ravana.

Chapter: 51

The combat of Jataayu and Ravana ensues now, as Ravana was adamantine to the righteous sermons of Jataayu. 
In combating with Ravana, Jataayu shatters Ravana's bows, arrows, and chariot and kills the mules of 
the chariot and plucks off the head of the charioteer with his beak. Further Jataayu attacks on the 
body of Ravana lacerating severally. Enraged at the bird-hits Ravana severs that eagle's wings, feet, 
and sides. Then seeing that fallen eagle Seetha weeps over, as if Jataayu is her own relative.

Chapter: 52

Seetha is abducted by Ravana. When they are on their way to Lanka the whole nature along with its inhabitants 
laments for the atrocious abduction of Seetha. In here, almost every verse is elaborated, for they contain 
poetic niceties, and hence more stuffing in introduction is unbefitting.

Chapter: 53
Seetha denounces Ravana's misdeed and challenges him to brave her husband in a manly
combat, rather than thieving her in a mousy way. She reasons with him about his propriety in
abducting other's wives, in vainglory.

Chapter: 54
Seetha drops her ornaments at Sugreeva and other monkeys available on a mountaintop
during the course of her abduction. Ravana does not take notice of this as he is hurrying as though
haunted by Rama. On crossing the southerly ocean, his jitteriness in stealing Seetha ceases and he
hypocritically feels elated in gaining both Seetha and an animosity with Rama.

Chapter: 55

Ravana entices Seetha to marry him by demonstrating various luxuries and comforts, and even baiting 
her to become his empress. The words of Ravana have some latent meanings as derived by ancient commentators 
and they are included here, as far as possible.

Chapter: 56

Seetha reprimands Ravana in saying that her unswerving devotion to Rama will not permit her to be dominated 
by anyone. She gives word-by-word replies to all that is prattled by Ravana in earlier chapter. A discussion 
about Seetha's stance and stability is given in the endnote of this chapter.

Chapter: 57

Rama meets Lakshmana while returning to hermitage after killing the deer demon Maareecha. He also confronts 
some ill omens and worries why Lakshmana left Seetha alone and came to him, sad facedly.

Chapter: 58

Rama is anguished for Seetha's aloneness and it is expressed in his chastening Lakshmana. Rama asks 
him as to why he left Seetha unguarded in the lonely forest. Rama rushes rapidly to hermitage thinking 
and talking that rapidly to Lakshmana about Seetha, and on arriving he finds vacuity in hermitage and 
then he is thrown in throes of despair.

Chapter: 59

Rama reprimands Lakshmana for coming without Seetha. Lakshmana explains that he had to leave her owing 
to her anguished and angrily words and even by her rash remarks of Lakshmana. Even then, Rama is unhappy 
of Lakshmana's action in leaving her alone.

Chapter: 60

Rama laments for Seetha's separation. He starts searching for her and goes on asking every plant, tree 
and animal, in a kind of frenzied attitude. This chapter is too poetic to summarise, hence this much 
is said here.

Chapter: 61

Rama laments for Seetha and becomes despondent. But at the advice of Lakshmana both of them start a 
search for Seetha, presuming that she might be available in the proximity. Later they embark on a thorough 
search in the entire forest and its mountains and at lakesides, but Seetha is unseen.

Chapter: 62
Rama bewails for Seetha as an ambivert, ambivalent romantic epical hero and asks
Lakshmana to return to Ayodhya, as Rama is certain to perish without Seetha. He thinks his agony
aloud, weighing pros and cons of his situation.

Chapter: 63

Rama laments while searching for Seetha and reminiscing over his past, which was spent happily with 
Seetha. Rama and Lakshmana search for her at riversides of Godavari but she is unseen there. Though 
Lakshmana continuously encourages Rama for a thorough search without submitting to mere anguish, Rama 
sinks into his own anguish.

Chapter: 64
Rama finds Seetha's flowers and footprints, followed by heavy footprints of some
male massive demon. On detailed probing there appear some more ruins of a combat between two
warriors. Concluding that Seetha is definitely abducted by a massive demon, Rama wants to
countermove the universe, even by waging a war with gods.

Chapter: 65
Lakshmana pacifies Rama with reasonable argument in saying that, owing to the felony
committed by a single soul, the entire world cannot be put to arrow. But a humanly search is to be
conducted first to find him out, who abducted Seetha. If she is unavailable even after a thorough
search, then that which is appropriate to the situation obtaining then, it can be effectuated.

Chapter: 66
Lakshmana reasons with Rama regarding the drastic action Rama is about to take in
annihilating the worlds. He says many pithy references in dissuading Rama. This chapter likens to
Bhagavad Gita, as its terse version.

Chapter: 67
Rama spots Jataayu, whose wings are hacked and who is breathless, and is in his last
moments. On conceding to the suggestion of Lakshmana that they should search for Seetha, they start
searching the forest and at certain place the mountainous Jataayu is seen. Mistaking him to be a
demon Rama wants to kill and speedily approaches Jataayu, but on listening Jataayu's words, Rama
recognises and laments for his wretched situation.

Chapter: 68

Jataayu names Ravana as the abductor of Seetha while breathing his last. Though he struggles hard to 
say what all has happened, the Time called death takes him away, at such a time when the important information 
is about to be said to Rama. Receiving that much information at least, Rama consigns Jataayu to funeral 
fire, like his own relative and performs other rites, and then proceeds for searching Seetha.

Chapter: 69

Kabandha captures Rama and Lakshmana while they are searching forests for Seetha. In the meantime, a 
demoness named Ayomukhi wanted to romance with Lakshmana, but Lakshmana cuts her ear and nose and chases 
away. The episode of Kabandha has a turning point in the epic.

Chapter: 70

Kabandha's overlong arms are cut off when he wanted to devour Rama and Lakshmana as godsend dainty morsels. 
Then Kabandha wishes to know who these two are and when Lakshmana informs him of Rama, that demon feels 
elated for his accursed state is over at the hands of Rama.

Chapter: 71

Kabandha requests Rama to incinerate him, so that he would get his divine form and then would be able 
to give some clues in regaining Seetha. He admits that the present hideous state has chanced only because 
of his arrogant behaviour, thereby a sort of repentance has occurred in him. A course of conversations 
occurs among these two, as each is distrustful of the other.

Chapter: 72

When Rama incinerates Kabandha he resurrects as a celestial being and detailing about Sugreeva he urges 
Rama to befriend him. He informs Rama that Sugreeva is also in a similar condition and he needs some 
one to rely upon, in order to overcome his problems, and thus Kabandha asks Rama to help Sugreeva, and 
get help as requital from Sugreeva.

Chapter: 73

Kabandha extols Pampa Lake and details Rama about the course to be adopted to proceed to Mt. Rishyamuka 
to befriend Sugreeva. He details about Matanga hermitage and implores upon Rama to visit an anchoress 
name Shabari, who is waiting for ages to have a glimpse of Rama.

Chapter: 74

Shabari is emancipated from mortality after her showing Matanga hermitage to Rama. Both the brothers 
approach Shabari as said by Kabandha and she adores them on their seeking her presence. She honours 
them as visitant guests and expresses her desire to depart to the spheres where her teachers are. Rama 
gives consent to it, on which she offers herself into fire and emerges as a divine angel, to ascend 
to heaven.

Chapter: 75

Rama arrives at the auspicious Pampa Lake according to the suggestion of Kabandha. On seeing that pious 
environ of that lake Rama has a breather and he expects some good to happen now. On further beholding 
the ladylike Pampa Lake, his thoughts move to Seetha, and he is again dispirited. However, on overcoming 
that short spell of his anguish, he proceeds with Lakshmana to the nearby of the lake.

