Chapter: 1
Valmiki describes the innumerable virtues of Sree Rama in this sarga. Dasaratha
wants to coronate Rama as the crown prince with the approval of all his people. With this end in
mind, he invites various citizens, important people from all cities and villages in his
kingdom.

Chapter: 2
Dasaratha mentions his desire about coronation of Rama before the assembly of
people. All people in the assembly unanimously and delightfully accept it while describing all of
Rama's virtues.

Chapter: 3
Dasaratha, glad after hearing the words of assembled people, requests Vasishta and
Vamadeva to start arrangements for the anointing ceremony of Rama. Vasishta and Vamadeva order the
officers present there to make all arrangements, describing them in detail. Dasaratha then orders
Sumantra to bring Rama to the assembly. After letting Rama know of his desire, Dasaratha then
advises Rama on how to rule the kingdom for the benefit of the people.

Chapter: 4
Dasaratha decides to coronate Rama as the prince the next day. He asks Sumantra to
bring Rama to his presence once again. After Rama arrives, Dasaratha expresses to Rama his desire
to anoint Rama as a prince the very next day. He cites various bad dreams and inauspicious signs as
the reason for his haste. Rama thus informed by his father, goes to his mother's house and informs
her of the good news. Kausalya becomes delighted at the news and gives Rama her blessings.

Chapter: 5
On the wish of King Dasaratha, Vasishta goes to Rama's palace and asks him to
perform fast that night along with Seetha. Vasishta returns to Dasaratha's palace and informs him
about this. On the way to the king's palace Vasishta observes the festive atmosphere in Ayodhya
anticipating Rama's coronation the next day.

Chapter: 6
In this chapter Valmiki narrates various rituals undertaken by Rama the crown
prince, along with his wife Seetha, on the eve of his anointment ceremony. The festivities in
Ayodhya, the happiness of the people with King Dasaratha's decision to anoint Rama are also
described here. Also, people from different directions arrive in Ayodhya to be there on the grand
occasion.

Chapter: 7
Manthara feels very sad after hearing about anointment of Rama for the princely
kingdom. She tells Kaikeyi about the coronation of Rama. Kaikeyi becomes delighted and gives
Manthara one of her jewels.

Chapter: 8
Manthara with her wicked thoughts tries to convince Kaikeyi of the possible
misfortune that could occur to Kaikeyi and her family if Sri Rama becomes the King. Although
Kaikeyi's initial reaction is to praise Rama's qualities; her mind is slowly but surely poisoned by
Manathara's sinful words.

Chapter: 9
This chapter describes Manthara's success in turning Kaikeyi's mind away from good
towards evil.

Chapter: 10
In this chapter, Kaikeyi enters the house of wrath. Dasaratha tries to pacify her
anger.

Chapter: 11
In this chapter Kaikeyi asks King Dasaratha to fulfill the boons given to her in
earlier times.

Chapter: 12
Dasaratha is shocked by the strange wishes of Kaikeyi and tries to convince Kaikeyi of
her wishes as being harmful. Kaikeyi would not heed to the emperor's words.

Chapter: 13
In this chapter, Sage Valmiki describes the bitter agony of Dasaratha on hearing to
the adamant Kaikeyi's words.

Chapter: 14
This chapter starts with Kaikeyi's entreaties to the king followed by Dasaratha
disowning her as wife. The night passes and Sumantra comes to wake up the King. Ordered by Kaikeyi
to bring Sri Rama to the king, he goes to Sri Rama to fetch Him.

Chapter: 15
In this chapter, Sumantra enters the royal court and observes all the arrangements made
for the coronation of Sri Rama. Ordered by Dasaratha to fetch Sri Rama, he enters the mighty building
of Sri Rama.

Chapter: 16
In this chapter, Sumantra arrives at Rama's palace to fetch him to royal court. Rama
starts to the royal court to meet his father. On the way Rama observes the jubiliant city.

Chapter: 17
This chapter further describes journey towards the royal palace. On the way Rama hears
blessings and well meaning words of his friends and various people gathered there.

Chapter: 18
In this chapter Rama arrives at the king's presence. Seeing King disturbed, Rama
becomes grieved and wants to know the cause of king's perturbance. Queen Kaikeyi describes to Rama
about the boons that Dasaratha had given earlier and also her wishes of coronating Bharatha instead
of Rama and sending Rama to Dandaka forest. On listening to these harsh words of Kaikeyi, Rama did
not become sorrowful, but Dasaratha was very much disturbed.

Chapter: 19
Rama on hearing the harsh and cruel words of Kaikeyi remains unruffled. He asks
Kaikeyi sorrowfuly about the reason the king did not speak to him directly about the matter. He
then immediately decides to leave for forest after duly saluting the king and Kaikeyi. On the way
to forest He desires to visit his mother and Sita and inform them of his decision.

Chapter: 20
Rama approaches his mother Kausalya to inform her of the calamity. Kausalya on
hearing the news, faints. On recovering, she laments in the most grevious tones to Rama.

Chapter: 21
This chapter describes Lakshmana's anger and Rama consoling Lakshmana.

Chapter: 22
In this chapter Rama further tries to pacify Lakshmana and tells him that his stay in
forest is the will of gods. He also wants all the celebration for his coronation to be stopped.

Chapter: 23
This chapter describes the valiant words of Lakshmana, his opposing depends on god
and proposes to fight with Rama's enemies to endow Rama with Kingdom.

Chapter: 24
In this chapter Kausalya requests Rama to take her to forest also. But Rama stops
Kausalya saying that service of husband is the ultimate dharma of wife and he obtains her
permission for him to go to forest.

Chapter: 25
In this chapter Kausalya bids farewell to Rama preparing to go to forest. Rama
leaves her residence and goes to Seetha.

Chapter: 26
Seeing Rama being sad seetha wants to know the reason Rama then lets her know his
father's wish and his decision to go to forest. He then askes her to stay in Ayodhya.

Chapter: 27
In this chapter Seetha asks Rama to take her to the forest.

Chapter: 28
In this chapter Rama describes various troubles of staying in forest and beseeches
seetha not to go to forest

Chapter: 29
Seetha implores upon Rama to allow her to come to forests, and says that she heard
through some foretellers that she has to live in forests for some time, when she was with her
father's place. But Rama is not interested to make Seetha's life penurious in forests and once
again tries to pacify her. He asks her to stay back at Ayodhya. For that Seetha laments to become
lonely parted with her husband.

Chapter: 30
The persistence of Seetha continues to go along with Rama to forest. But Rama tried
to pacify her telling that rendering service to elders staying back at home is advisable for ladies
like Seetha, but in vain. Finally Rama had to yield to her prevail and accepts her to come along
and asks her to give away her personal belongings to Brahmins in charity before they proceed.

Chapter: 31
Overhearing the conversation of Rama and Seetha, Lakshmana who came there earlier
enters into dialogue with his brother, insisting that he too shall accompany Rama and Seetha to
forests. Rama tries to persuade him to stay back, in vain. Then Rama had to agree to Lakshmana's
insistence and asks him to fetch the divine bows, arrows and swords given by gods in the
Vedic-ritual of Seetha's father, namely King Janaka.

Chapter: 32
Rama bestows parting gifts to Vedic scholars and their wives. Thereafter he also
accords charities to Brahmins, young scholars, servants, and others. Rama accords an unusual gift,
of cows filling a space of miles and miles, to a poor Brahmin named Trijata. Then Rama is blessed
for a bon voyage by all of the eminent Vedic scholars.

Chapter: 33
Rama while going to his father at Queen Kaikeyi's palace listens the people's voice
of sorrow for his exile. They sadly express their heartfelt feelings. On reaching the palace, Rama
bids Sumantra to inform Dasharatha about his arrival for paying respects at the time of
departure.

Chapter: 34
Rama comes to see his father Dasharatha and Dasharatha summons Sumantra to fetch all
his wives to hither, and asks Rama to stay with him at least for a night. But Rama resolved in his
vow, persuades his father to be peaceful. Dasharatha's anguish intensifies and he swoons at the
departure of Rama.

Chapter: 35
Minister Sumantra requests and reproaches Queen Kaikeyi and asks her to take back
her impositions. Even the elderly minister and a scholar named Siddhartha tries to pacify Kaikeyi
by telling the legend of Sagara, the ancestor of Dasharatha, quoting the exile of his notorious son
Asamanja. But she is adamant to all holy advices, but wants Rama to go to forests.

Chapter: 36
Dasharatha orders to send army and treasury with Rama to forests. Kaikeyi objects to
such a lavish exile and she retorts the same legend of Sagara who exiled his son, Asamanja, without
riches. Minister Siddhartha still ties to persuade her. Then vexed King Dasharatha also tries to
embark on the exile along with Rama.

Chapter: 37
Jute-cloths that are befitting to sages and saints are brought in for the three at
the behest of Kaikeyi. Rama and Lakshmana accept and wear them. But Seetha, as a par excellent
princess of Mithila, is baffled in wearing them and when she is irksome as how to tie and toggle
them, Rama goes to her and demonstrates how to wear them, on her silken robes. Seeing that
situation, all the womenfolk in the palace chamber wail for the hardship befallen on Seetha.

Chapter: 38
Dasharatha is enraged to see his precious daughter-in-law in rags and takes Kaikeyi
to task. Rama seeks blessings of his father for departure and requests him to keep his mother
Kausalya, who is aging, comfortable.

Chapter: 39
Sumantra arranges for a chariot for the travel of Rama, Seetha, and Lakshmana at the
orders of Dasharatha. Kingly ornaments are obtained for Seetha. Rama seeks blessings from his
mother Kausalya and others too. Kausalya's parting advises to Seetha.

Chapter: 40
The departure of Rama from Ayodhya for his exile is depicted. When they are
charioted through the streets of Ayodhya the citizenry wails and weeps for Rama's disposition. In
his unsurpassable affection towards Rama, King Dasharatha follows the chariot like a commoner, but
fails to go further and falls down.

Chapter: 41
The ladies of the royal gymnasium lament over the exile of Rama and others. The
citizens of Ayodhya also are reduced to a miserable plight. All Nature mourns at Rama's
departure.

Chapter: 42
The dust raised by Rama's chariot having disappeared for a while, Dasaratha feels
dejected and fell insensible on ground. When Kaikeyi comes forward to support him he scolds and
asks her not to touch him. Kausalya then lifts him up and persuades him to return to their house.
His personal attendants take him to Kausalya's apartments and seeing him plunged in grief, Kausalya
seats herself beside him and began to lament in various ways.

Chapter: 43
Lamentation of Kausalya

Chapter: 44
Establishing the greatness of Rama, Sumitra of gracious speech, assuages Kausalya's
grief.

Chapter: 45
Rama requests the citizens to return to Ayodhya and to show respect to Bharata the
prince Regent and Dasaratha the king. The citizens try to persuade Rama to return to Ayodhya, but
in vain. Rama along with all of them reach the bank of Tamasa.

Chapter: 46
Having reached the banks of Tamasa river and thinking of the plight of the people of
Ayodhya, Rama passes the night on the banks of Tamasa river. Waking up in the meantime, Rama
instructs the charioteer to drive the chariot in such a way as to elude the citizens and lead them
to think that the chariot had turned back towards Ayodhya instead of proceeding towards the forest.
He then ascends the chariot along with Sita and Lakshmana and went ahead to the forest.

Chapter: 47
The multitude that had caused Rama in his journey to the forest wake up to find Rama
and his associates gone. They begin to rebuke themselves. Overwhelmed with grief, they hunt up to
tracks of Rama's chariot. Being unable to find the tracks, they helplessly return to Ayodhya in
sheer despair.

Chapter: 48
Informed by the citizens of Rama's departure for the forest, when they returned to
Ayodhya after being unable to find out the tracks of his chariot, the wives of the citizens
reproach Kaikeyi and break into lamentation.

Chapter: 49
Having traveled for a pretty long distance, Rama crossed Vedasruti, Gomati and
Syandika rivers. He presses forward in the chariot talking with Sumantra.

Chapter: 50
Rama bids farewell to his birth-place Ayodhya and reaches the bank of the holy
Ganga. There, Nishadas offers welcome reception to Rama and others.

Chapter: 51
Guha requests Lakshmana to take rest, duly expressing his readiness to guard Rama
and his consort by keeping awake the whole night. Lakshmana expressed his unwillingness to lie down
in the presence of his elder brother and sister in law and preferred to remain awake. He spends
night talking with Guha, voicing grief for his royal father as well as his affectionate
mothers.

Chapter: 52
As per instructions of Rama, Guha gets a boat ready. Sumantra requests Rama to take
him as a personal attendant to the forest, but Rama declines his offer and after reasoning with
him, sends him back to Ayodhya. Rama and Lakshmana matted their hair with the latex of a banyan
tree procured by Guha. On reaching the middle of the stream, Sita offers prayers to Mother Ganga
(the deity presiding over the stream) and after crossing the river, all the three halt for the
night at the foot of a tree.,

Chapter: 53
Rama tries to send Lakshmana back to Ayodhya, apprehending trouble for Kousalya and
others in the hands of Kaikeyi. Lakshmana however refuses to return to Ayodhya, pleasing his
inability to survive in the absence of Rama. Rama thereafter agrees again for Lakshmana's stay in
the forest with him.

Chapter: 54
Rama, Seetha and Lakshmana reach the hermitage of Bharadwaja, situated a the
confluence of Ganga and Yamuna rivers. The sage Bharadwaja extends hospitality to them and
recommends Chitrakuta as the fittest place for them to sojourn in. Spending the night in discourses
on various matters with him, the sage grants him leave early next morning to depart for
Chitrakuta.

Chapter: 55
Sage Bharadwaja informs the route by which Rama and Lakshmana can reach Chitrakuta.
They cross the River Yamuna by a raft prepared by themselves. Seetha prays the River Yamuna and a
fig tree called Syama. The three of them traveled for a couple of miles along the bank of Yamuna,
strolling in the charming forest and reach a leveled ground on the bank to take rest for the
night.

Chapter: 56
Seetha, Rama and Lakshmana reach the mountain of Chitrakuta, beholding and showing
one another the grandeur of the woods there. They visit the hermitage of sage Valmiki. Lakshmana
builds a leaf-hut upon instructions from Rama. All of them enter the hut, after performing
purification ceremony.

Chapter: 57
Sumantra takes leave from Guha, who learns from his spies that Rama departed for
Chitrakuta. Sumantra drives back to Ayodhya. Entering the royal gynaeceum, he submits to the
emperor what he earlier reported to the citizens who followed his chariot. Dasaratha and Kausalya
fall into a faint to hear about Rama's departure for Chitrakuta. All the inmates of gynaeceum weep
loudly in anguish.

Chapter: 58
As per the orders of king Dasaratha, Sumantra delivers the parting messages of Rama
and Lakshmana. Rama sends positive messages to Kausalya and Bharata but Lakshmana sends angry
messages to Dasaratha.

Chapter: 59
Sumantra narrates the ghastly fate of Ayodhya, both its animate and inanimate
beings. Dasaratha laments and soon falls unconscious.

Chapter: 60
Sumantra was unable to console Kausalya, who lied on the floor due to her extreme
grief over her separation from Rama, even though he tries to avert her grief by telling her that
Rama can reside in the forest delightfully, by warding off his agony.

Chapter: 61
Kausalya, while weeping, rebukes Dasaratha for his evil act of sending Rama to
exile. She explains various difficulties being faced by Rama, Lakshmana and Seetha in their
forest-life. She says that even if Rama returns to Ayodhya in the fifteenth year, he may not accept
the kingdom since enjoyed by Bharata.

Chapter: 62
After hearing harsh words from Kausalya, king Dasaratha loses consciousness and
restores it after a long time. Afterwards, Kausalya repents for her mistake of speaking such crude
words and consoles the king with her reconciliatory words. Overcome by grief, Dasaratha fell into
the grip, Dasaratha fell into the grip of slumber as the night prevailed.

Chapter: 63
Dasaratha woke up with anxious thoughts. Recalling his earlier sin, he starts
recounting the story of a young ascetic to Kausalya. He says that while he was Prince Regent of
Ayodhya, he went out for hunting in a forest one day and heard the sound of a hermit-boy filling
his pitcher with water by suberging it into Sarayu River. Mistaking the gurgling sound for
trumpeting of an elephant the prince hit the boy with an arrow, which went deep into the body and
mortally wounded him. On approaching the victim, he discovered the fatal blunder and tendered his
heart felt apologies to the hermit boy, who asked him to extract the arrow from his body and inform
his parents. The boy died soon after the arrow was drawn out from the body.

Chapter: 64
King Dasaratha continued to narrate to Kausalya how he went to the aged parents of
the deceased sage and informed about the death of their son and its cause, how he escorted them to
their son to the river where he was lying dead, how embracing the boy they wept and offered
libations of water to his spirit, how invested with an ethereal body, the spirit ascended to heaven
while consoling the aged couple and finally how, having cursed the king that he too would die of
agony caused by the separation from his son, the aged couple gave up their lives. Having thus
narrated the story of his getting the curse long back and loudly weeping, king Dasaratha dies of
grief.

Chapter: 65
At the dawn of the next day, panergysts and servants arrived at the palace to serve
the king. Some women, who were empowered to go near the bed, detected the king's death and started
crying loudly. Kausalya and Sumitra suddenly woke up from their slumber and came to know of the
king's death. All the wives of Dasaratha wept miserably. The gynaecium was filled with men and
women who felt bewildered with fear and restlessness; when the king met with his appointed end.

Chapter: 66
Kausalya reproaches Kaikeyi for her wrong deeds, while weeping profusely for her
husband's death. The chamberlains reverently remove Kausalya from the place of the king's body,
which they later keep in a trough filled with oil. The ministers and other functionaries return to
their abodes, when the night fell in darkness.

Chapter: 67
That night in Ayodhya passed over with agony. At sunrise the Brahmins who enthrone a
person as a king, assembled and requested Vasista the family priest of Ikshvakus to select a youth
to be crowned as a king of Ayodhya. They enunciated the various evil consequences of allowing the
country without a king and leaving it in anarchy.

Chapter: 68
With the concurrence of Markandeya and other sages, Vasistha instructs messengers to
call back Bharata and Satrughna from their maternal uncle's house. The messengers leave immediately
for the capital of Kekaya, riding their fast horses. They cross Ganga River at Hastinapura, then
Saranda River and reach Abhikala village. Then, they cross the holy river of Ikshumati and proceed
through Bahlika kingdom in Sudama mountain range to Vishnupada and finally reach the city of
Girivraja.

Chapter: 69
Bharata experiences a bad dream on that very night in which the messengers entered
the city of Girivraja. His friends in the palace arranged entertainment like recitation of stories,
playing of musical instruments, stage plays and jokes to make him cheerful. Even then, his
depression was not gone. Bharata explains in detail his unpleasant dream in its different forms to
his friends.

Chapter: 70
The messengers entered the city of Rajagriha and meet the king Kekeya and prince
Yudhajit. They request Bharata to start for Ayodhya urgently. Bharata seeks permission from king
Kekeya his maternal uncle. King Kekeya gives permission to Bharata to leave for Ayodhya and bestows
him various gifts. Bharata and Satrughna along with men. elephants and horses start his journey for
Ayodhya.

Chapter: 71
Spending seven nights in his journey, crossing various streams and rivers and
passing through many woods and territories, Bharata reaches the city of Ayodhya, from there ,he
finds the city of Ayodhya in a forlorn mood and discusses this situation with the charioteer. With
an apprehensive and gloomy mind, he enters his father's house.

Chapter: 72
Bharata does not find his father in the royal palace and goes to meet his mother. He
asks his mother about the whereabouts his father. Kaikeyi informs Bharata about the death of
Dasaratha. When Bharata enquired about Rama, Kaikeyi also discloses Rama's exile to the forest
along with Sita and Lakshmana. She also narrates about the two boons she asked the king Dasaratha
as well as how the king accepted her boons and sent Rama to exile. She further advises Bharata to
meet the chief of Brahmans like Vasista and others to get himself crowned for the kingdom.

Chapter: 73
Bharata reproached Kaikeyi in many ways. Pricking with his unpleasant remarks,
Bharata tells her that he will bring back Rama from the forest, install him on the throne of
Ayodhya and become his attendant.

Chapter: 74
Bharata censures Kaikeyi saying that because of her, Dasaratha is dead and Rama is
sent to exile. He abuses his mother of her greed for the kingdom and the misfortune thus brought to
Kausalya, Sumitra and other mothers because of his father's death and brother's exile to the
forest. He compares the grief of the Kausalya with the grief of Kamadhenu the mythical cow who was
aggrieved of a pair of bullocks (her sons) being harassed by a plough -man. Bharata then promises
that he would bring Rama back to Ayodhya and make him as a king.

Chapter: 75
Bharata asserts that he does not know how the exile of Rama, Sita and Lakshmana has
occurred. Bharata and Satrughna go to Kausalya's place. Kausalya speaks harsh words to Bharata,
saying that Kaikeyi his mother procured for him the kingdom as desired by him the kingdom as
desired by him. Bharata politely explains, on a number of oaths, his own innocence over the matter,
Kausalya comes to know Bharata's heart, fondly takes him to her lap and weeps distressfully.

Chapter: 76
Vasistha advises Bharata to stop lamenting and to perform the last rites of the
king. Bharata then places the body of Dasaratha on a couch, taking it out from the vessel where it
had been immersed in oil and proceeds with the funeral rites. The appointed priests, attendants,
people of the city and the weeping royal women followed the funeral pile of the king to the banks
of Sarayu River where the body was cremated. Bharata along with others return to the city after the
completion of the cremation-ceremony.

Chapter: 77
On the twelfth day of the death of Dasaratha, Bharata gives various presents to
Brahmans. On the thirteenth day when Bharata and Shatrughna go to the cremation ground to collect
the bones both of them are overwhelmed with grief and fall down on the ground. Vasista, the family
priest and Sumantra raise them up and pacifying urge both of them to complete the remaining rites
to be performed on the thirteenth day.

Chapter: 78
Shatrughna asks Bharata why even Lakshmana could not prevent Dasaratha from sending
Rama to the forest. Meanwhile, when Manthara arrives at the scen, Shatrughna seizes her with his
powerful hand, threatens to punish her and abuses Kaikeyi too. When Kaikeyi pleads for mercy with
her son, Bharata intervenses and Shatrughna releases Manthara.

Chapter: 79
The king-makers request Bharata to take over Ayodhya kingdom. Bharata refuses to do
so and promises to bring back Rama to Ayodhya and make him only as the king. Bharata further orders
for construction of a path-way to reach the forest.

Chapter: 80
The engineers construct a comfortably high-way from Ayodhya to the River Ganga, by
clearing off shrubs and stones on the way and excellent wells were dug. Beautiful tents were also
built on the path.

Chapter: 81
When Bharata hear the sound of couches and drums early in the morning, he gets more
depressed. He orders for stopping of those sounds and starts lamenting. Then, Vasishta the
family-priest enters the assembly-hall and sends messengers, asking them to call Bharata urging him
to be present in the court, and in response to his call, Bharata with Shatrughna, the ministers and
others enter the assembly.

Chapter: 82
Vasishta requests Bharata to get himself anointed as a king. Bharata refuses to rob
the throne from Rama. Who is really elighible for it as the eldest son of the family. He resolves
to bring back Rama from the forest and orders Sumantra to arrange for vehicles and men for the
journey. Thereupon, warriors merchants Shudras and Bhrahmanas harnessed their chariots and got
ready for the journey to the forest along with Bharata.

Chapter: 83
Leaving Ayodhya early next morning, accompanied by family-priests, ministers,
archers, elephants, cavalry, artisans, army and citizens and covering a long distance, Bharata
arrives at the bank of Ganga River at Sringaberapura ruled by guha and, encamping the army there,
breaks journey for offering libations to his deceased father on the bank of the Ganaga and also to
give rest to the retinue.

Chapter: 84
Guha the king of Nishada tribe asks his relative to guard the river bank and get
ready for a battle, if necessary, with Bharata. Then, Guha approaches Bharata with a welcome-drink
of honey, meat and fish. He asks Bharata with his army to accept his hospitality.

Chapter: 85
Bharata thanks Guha for having come forward to offer hospitality to him and his army. He enquires about
the proper route to proceed to the hermitage of Bharadvaja. Guha assures Bharata that he along with some
of his ferrymen will follow him as guides. When Guha enquires Bharata whether he has an evil intention towards
Rama, Bharata clarifies him that he is proceeding to Rama?s place to bring him back to Ayodhya. When night falls
Bharata along with Shatrughna and his army take rest. However Guha consoles Bharata, who has been constantly
bewailing, till the nightfall.

Chapter: 86
Guha reports to Bharata, how Rama and his party broke their journey at
Shringaverapura and narrate to him the dialogue that took place between Lakshmana and himself
during that night. Guha further tells him how Rama and Lakshmana matted their hair into a thick
mass crossed the holy river with Seetha and left for the hermitage of Sage Bharadwaja.

Chapter: 87
Hearing Guha's words about Rama, Bharata fell unconscious. Bharata eases himself
thereafter and asks Guha to report further details about Rama. Guha informs that eventhough he
offered various kinds of flood to Rama, the latter refused it. He adds that Rama Seetha and
Lakshmana observed fasting for that night. Guha also informs Bharata that Lakshmana laid a bed of
grass for Rama as well as Seetha to sleep theron and Lakshmana stood guarding Rama during the
night, along with Guha and his kinsmen.

Chapter: 88
Bharata and his minister approach the foot of Angudi tree, where Rama has slept on a
grass-bed on the ground. Bharata feels bad that on his account, Rama and Seetha were to sleep on
such a grass-bed. He thinks that the city of Ayodhya is plunged in desolation, because of the death
of Dasaratha and the exile of Rama to the forest. Bharata further takes an owe that like Rama, he
will also henceforth sleep on grass with his locks matted, wearing robes of bark and living only on
roots and fruits. He says that if Rama refuses his appeal to occupy the throne of Ayodhya, he also
will stay back in the forest along with Rama.

Chapter: 89
Having passed the night on the banks of Ganga, Bharata asks Guha to make
arrangements for their troops to cross the river by boats. Accordngly, Guha has kept ready five
hundred boat with their ferry-men for the purpose. All of them reach the opposite shore of ther
river. Encamping the army at the shore in the magnificient woods of Prayaga, Bharata along with the
priests and king's counsellors, approach the hermitage of Bharadwaja.

Chapter: 90
Bharata along with Vasishta proceed to see Bharadwaja. Bharadwaja welcomes both of
them hospitable. After exchanging pleasantries Bharadwaja asks Bharata whether he is coming to the
forest to do any harm to Rama and Lakshmana. Bharata replies that he is coming to the forest for
the purpose of taking back Rama to Ayodhya. When enquired by Bharata about the whereabouts of Rama,
Bharadwaja informs that Rama along with Seetha and Lakshmana are staying on the chitrakuta
mountain. Thereafter, at the request of Bharadwaja, Bharata along with his routine decides to make
a night halt on that day at that hermitage and to proceed to Chitrakuta on the following
morning.

Chapter: 91
Having been instructed by Bharadwaja to bring the army to his place, Bharata allowed
his army also to come to the hermitage. Then, Bharadwaja invokes Visvakarma, the divine architect
and requests him to arrange for a befitting hopsitality to Bharata,

Chapter: 92
Bharata approaches the sage Bharadwaja and seeks his permission to leave. Bharata
asks Bhardwaja the exact route by which he can reach the abode of Rama. Bharadwaja gives the
details of the path towards the banks of river Mandakini, situated at the north of Chitrakuta
mountain, where Rama is stationed along with Seetha and Lakshmana. Hearing of the journey,
Dasaratha's wives approach Bharadwaja and offer their salutations to him. Bharata introduces his
mothers one by one to Bharadwaja. While introducing his mother, Kaikeyi to Bharadwaja, Bharata
describes Kaikeyi as the root-cause of their family's misfortune. But, the sage Bharadwaja consoles
him, saying that the exile of Rama would ultimately result in happiness the sages, celestials and
even the demons. Bharata finally bids farewell to the sage and proceeds to Chitrakuta, along with
his retinue.

Chapter: 93
Travelling for a long time, Bharata and his army reach Chitrakuta mountain. Bharata
Chitrakuta mountain. Bharata appreciates the beauty of that place and identifies it as an abode of
ascetics. He instructs his soldiers to explore the woods and find out where Rama and Lakshmana are
living. Valiant men penetrate into the forest and pursuing their search, they observe a plume of
smoke rising at some distance and concluding the site to be the hermitage of Rama. Bharata commands
his army to halt and decides to walk with Sumantra and Dhriti his spiritual preceptor to Rama's
hermitage.

Chapter: 94
Rama describes the beauty of Chitrakuta mountain to Seetha. He delightfully shows
her the various colourful minerals, several kinds of birds and animals, several type of trees with
flowers and fruit, as also the enchanting springs and Cascades in the mountain. Thus, he also
diverts his own mind in seeing that captivating scenery.

Chapter: 95
Rama describes to Seetha the beauty of Mandakini River with its multi-coloured
beaches, swans, geese, deer and flowery trees on its banks. He shows some sages taking dip in the
river and herds of elephants and monkeys coming for a drink there. Thus Rama and Seetha spend some
of their time in enjoying the charms of Chitrakuta mountain.

Chapter: 96
Rama hears a gigantic clamour of an army nearby and asks Lakshmana to find out what
it is. Lakshmana ascends a tree and informs Rama that Bharata's army is approaching towards their
hermitage. Lakshmana expresses his apprehension to Rama, saying that Bharata's army may be coming
there in order to kill both of them. An enraged Lakshmana says that he will kill both Bharata and
Kaikeyi together with the army.

Chapter: 97
Rama pacifies Lakshmana, saying that Bharata, due to his affection towards his
brothers and due to the distress that troubles his mind after hearing of the news of their exile,
he came to the forest and not with any other motive. Ashamed of himself to hear the opinion of Rama
about Bharata, and descending the tree, Lakshmana hides his abashment by changing the topic.
Commanded by Bharata that no disturbance should be caused to the hermitage occupied by Rama, the
army encamps around the edge of the mountain, chitrakuta.

Chapter: 98
Bharata instructs Shatrughna and Guha along with some troops each to search for Rama
and Lakshmana in the forest. Bharata, personally, along with his ministers citizens and priests,
proceed on foot to some other side of the forest for the search. He goes through the forest for
some time. Climbing up a sala tree, Bharata observes a plume of smoke at a distance and conjectures
that place as Rama's hermitage. Bharata quickly proceeds with quick steps, along with Guha, to see
Rama.

Chapter: 99
Bharata observes various signs, proving Rama's hermitage in the vicinity of his
place of search. After proceeding for a distance, Bharata beholds Rama's hermitage and Rama too
seated in the hut, wearing matted locks. Bharata laments on Rama's misfortune of living as an
ascetic Bharata and Shatrughna throw themselves on Rama's feet in salutation. Rama embraces them
both.

Chapter: 100
Rama gives instruction to Bharata as regards the duties of a king and the polity
under an ideal monarchy under the pretext of enquiring about the welfare of his father and
others.

Chapter: 101
Rama asks Bharata why he has come to the forest, wearing robes of bark and antelope
skin, abandoning Ayodhya kingdom. Bharata informs Rama about Dasaratha's death and requests Rama to
take over the kingdom, endowed to him as per succession. Rama says that since king Dasaratha
allotted two different duties to the two of them one enjoining the exile of his elder brother being
binding on him and the other bequeathing the kingdom to Bharata, they must be implicitly obeyed by
both of them.

Chapter: 102
Bharata replies that it is an established practice for the eldest son to become a
king and requests Rama to come to Ayodhya and get crowned in the kingdom for the welfare of
Ikshvaku race. Bharata requests Rama to offer traditional libations of water to their deceased
father, who died wtih the thought of Rama alone, absorbed in his mind.

Chapter: 103
Rama fainted away, after hearing the news of his father's death and is brought back
to consciousness by Bharata and others who sprinkle water on him. Rama laments in various ways.
Bharata consoles him. Rama in turn consoles Seetha who is weeping. Rama painfully reaches the River
Mandakini, offers water and balls of food to the spirit of his departed father and returns to the
hut. The crying sounds of those brothers mourning for their dad father with Seetha created and echo
in the mountain. Hearing their cry of distress, the troops approach Rama, who receives them all
with affection.

Chapter: 104
Preceded by Dasaratha's wives and others, Vasishta advances to the hermitage of
Rama. Kausalya, on the way, shows to her co-wives the balls of Ingudi fruit-pulp offered to the
spirits of Dasaratha by Rama on blades of Dabha grass, the raised spikes of which pointed towards
the south; along the bank of Mandakini River. Kausalya was stricken with anguish for her deceased
husband. Reaching the hermitage, both Rama and Lakshmana hold the feet of the Queens in salutation.
Kausalya feels sad at the fate of Seetha in the forest, when the latter touches her feet. Rama
holds the feet of his preceptor and takes his seat. Accompanied by his ministers, Bharata also sits
nearby.

Chapter: 105
Bharata requests Rama to oblige him by accepting the kingdom of Ayodhya, being
offered by him back to Rama with the concurrence of Kaikeyi, eventhough bestowed on him by their
deceased father. Rama consoles Bharata, saying that death is inevitable for living beings and they
should not grieve for their deceased father. Rama asks Bharata to control his grief and go back to
Ayodhya to shoulder the burden of rulership there in order to the command of their deceased father
and that Rama himself would obey his father's command by staying back in the forest.

Chapter: 106
Bharata requests Rama, giving various reasons, to accept the throne of Ayodhya. He
abuses his deceased father for having transgressed the righteousness merely for a fear of wrath
from Kaikeyi and requests Rama to reverse that transgression of righteousness. Bharata takes a vow
not to return to Ayodhya but to continue to stay in the forest in case Rama did not heed to his
request. Rama's mothers also join Bharata and urge Rama to grant his request, when they find Rama
lukewarm in the matter and insistent on implementing the words of his deceased father.

Chapter: 107
Rama reveals to Bharata that Kaikey's marriage, stating that Dasaratha would confer
the kingdom as a marriage-dowry. Rama also adds that Kaikeyi also received the promise of two boons
from Dasaratha as a token of his pleasure and gratitude for the help Kaikeyi rendered during the
conflict long ago between gods and demons. Rama further informs Bharata that according to that
promise, Kaikeyi asked for the two boons, one for Bharata's throne and another for his own exile to
the forest. Rama requests Bharata to make Dasaratha's promises true and asks him to return to
Ayodhya and assume its rulership.

Chapter: 108
A Brahmana named Jabali tries to persuade Rama to accept the kingdom by advocating
the theory of Nastikas (non-believers), saying that he need not get attached to his father's words
and remain in the troublesome forest. Jabali requests Rama to enjoy the royal luxuries, by
accepting the crown.

Chapter: 109
Rama refutes the atheistic arguments of Jabali and enunciates the importance of
truthfulness. He states that truth is God and all virtues follow truthfulness. Rama further adds
that there is nothing higher than truth. He announces that he wants to fulfil the command of is
father, who was a devotee of truth and stay back in the forest. Jabali replies that just for the
sake of convincing Rama to return to Ayodhya, he has spoken the words of a non-believer.

Chapter: 110
Vasishta gives details of the creation of the world to Sri Rama. He says that
Brahma, in the form of a boar caused the earth to rise from water and from Brahma is created the
entire world. He recites the Genealogy of Rama's line. He informs that Aja and Suvrata were the two
sons of Nabhaga and it was Aja who begot the virtuous King Dasaratha; Rama's father. Vasishta also
informs Rama that i the whole of Ikshvaku race, only the eldest son becomes the king. He requests
Sri Rama not to violate this tradition and take over the reins of Ayodhya.

Chapter: 111
Vashishta urges Rama to grant the prayer of Bharata. Rama replies that the command
given by his father cannot be disregarded. Bharata then decides to undertake a fest unto death as a
last resort to exert pressure on Rama. On Rama's dubbing such a step as repugnant to the code of
conduct prescribed for a kshatriya, Bharata requests Rama to allow him to remain in the forest as
the latter's proxy. Rama, however, rules out this proposition also, saying that it is a matter of
reproach. He reaffirms his resolve to enter Ayodhya only after implementing the pledge given to his
father.

Chapter: 112
On hearing the debate between Rama and Bharata, all the sages there were astonished.
The sages request Bharata to accept Rama's words. Bharata explains to Rama that he is unable to
rule the vast kingdom alone to the satisfaction of its subjects. Bharata further adds that Rama has
the necessary competence to save the world and makes a fervent appeal to Rama to return to Ayodhya.
However, Rama replies that Bharata is quite capable of ruling the kingdom and advises Bharata to
take counsel from his wise ministers before administering the kingdom. Rama reaffirms Bharata that
he will never be fulse to his father's vow. Finally, Bharata agrees to Rama;s proposition, but
requests Rama to offer his sandals to be carried by him to ayodhya so that the peope there would
get gain and security. Rama agrees to it and offers his sandals to Bharata, who takes a vow before
Rama to enter fire in case he did not return immediately after the expiry of his term of exile.
After embracing Bharata and Shatrughna, Rama bids farewell to all with due respect in accord with
the rank of each and enters his hermitage.

Chapter: 113
Keeping Rama's sandals on his head, Bharata ascends his chariot along with
Shatrughna. Bharata advances along with his troops along side the mountain of chitrakuta. On the
way, he beholds Bharadvaja's hermitage and meets the sage. Bharata informs the sage about the
insistance of Rama to stay back in the forest for fourteen years so as to honour the promise of his
father scruprulously and also Vaishta's advice to Rama to offer his sandals to Bharata, to ensure
peace and harmony in Ayodhya.

Chapter: 114
Bharata enters Ayodhya city, which appears to him gloomy and asks his charioteer why
the city is looking luster-less. Thus speaking in many ways, Bharata enters his father's house
which exhibits a vacant look and feels distressed.

Chapter: 115
After returning to Ayodhya, Bharata expresses his desire to proceed to Nandigrama
village. Vasishta and the other elders agree to his proposal. Bharata along with Shatrughna ascend
the chariot and proceed towards Nandigram. The ministers, family-priest, the army and the citizens
of Ayodhya followed Bharata in his journey. Installing the wooden sandals of Rama on the royal
throne, Bharata puts on the garb of an ascetic and carries on the rule under orders of the sandals,
holding the royal canopy over them.

Chapter: 116
Rama notices anxiety and perturbation among the sages who live in the vicinity. When
an elderly sage among them is asked by Rama about the reason for their anguish, the said sage
informs that some demons under the leadership of Khara are molesting the sages and hence the sages
wished to leave the place. Rama gives his consent for their leaving. Bidding farewell to them with
great respect, Rama retires to his own hermitage.

Chapter: 117
Rama, after due reflection, decides to leave Chitrakuta mountain because of many
handicaps. Setting out his journey from Chitrakuta mountain, he reaches the hermitage of Sage Atri
and offers his salutation to him. Introducing his wife Anansuya as a great female ascetic to Rama,
Atri urges Rama to send his concert Seetha to Anasuya. Anasuya receives Seetha, who greeted her and
gives her instructions on the role and responsibilities of a devoted wife.

Chapter: 118
Seetha agrees to the instructions given by Anasuya on the duties of a devoted wife.
At the end of the conversation with Seetha, Anasuya requests her to ask for a boon, and highly
pleased with her, Anasuya bestows heavenly flowers and ornaments on her. Anasuya then requests
Seetha to relate to her the story of her marriage with Rama. Then Seetha relates that story to
Anasuya in detail.

Chapter: 119
As the evening twilight approaches, Anasuya sends Seetha to Rama's presence. Seetha
approaches Rama and shows him the apparel, jewels and garlands gifted by Anasuya and duly adorned
by her, Rama spends the night there along with Seetha Lakshmana. At the onset of dawn, they take
leave of the ascetics and advance further into the great forest in the route suggested by the
ascetics.
