Chapter: 1


Chapter: 2


Chapter: 3

The scheming of the composition of epic Ramayana is described here. Whole of the epic 
is rendered in its quintessence, as to how Sage Valmiki scheduled the narration of important 
milestones of the epic.

Chapter: 4

Valmiki composed twenty four thousand verses and taught them to Lava and Kusha, the sons of 
Rama and Seetha. The two youngsters sing the ballad among the assemblages of sages and saints, 
and win laurels. Rama on seeing the boys singing on the streets and king's ways of Ayodhya, 
brings them to his palace, and summons all his brothers and ministers to listen to the ballad. 
Rama himself is put to the turmoil, for the ballad sung by these youngsters narrates the legend 
of Seetha. But he himself collecting his calm, Rama paid his attention to listen the 'Legend 
of Seetha' siithaayaH charitam mahat as Valmiki calls Ramayana.

Chapter: 5

We enter the capital of the Emperor Dasharatha. The pomp and glory of his capital is depicted 
along with its town planning and grandeur of the city, and its residents.

Chapter: 6

The riches and happiness enjoyed by the people, under the rein of Emperor Dasharatha, 
along with the details of its valiant heroes, elephants, horses and the town planning 
are narrated.

Chapter: 7

The truthful and upright characters of the ministers of Dasharatha are portrayed, 
who make the rulership meaningful with their virtuous, skilful and efficient administration. 
Along with the political ministers, the religious ministry is also portrayed.

Chapter: 8
Dasharatha decides to perform an elaborate Vedic ritual, called Aswamedha yajna, Horse Ritual, to beget
children. He being a considerate king in taking conscience of the courtiers, he discusses this aspect with the Vedic
scholars and ministers of his court, beforehand.

Chapter: 9

Sumantra, the minister of King Dasharatha, details the importance of Sage Rishyasringa and 
beseeches the king to invite that sage to preside over the contemplated Vedic ritual, for 
that Sage's entry into any kingdom is auspicious for that land and people.

Chapter: 10

Sumantra, the minister continues his narration to his king Dasharatha, about Rishyashringa's 
arrival at Anga kingdom of King Romapaada and his marriage with Princess Shantha, the daughter 
of Romapada.

Chapter: 11

On the advice of his minister Sumantra, Dasharatha proceeds to Anga kingdom to 
fetch Sage Rishyasringa and his wife Shanta to his capital Ayodhya.

Chapter: 12


Chapter: 13


Chapter: 14


Chapter: 15


Chapter: 16

Vishnu agrees to incarnate as human and selects Dasharatha as his father. And when Dasharatha 
is performing the Vedic ritual called putrakaameSTi a deity called
praajaapatya-puruSha arises from the sacrificial fire to give 
a golden vessel of divine dessert to Dasharatha for distribution among his queens to beget 
progeny. The three queens on consuming that dessert conceive their children.

Chapter: 17

The gods become progenitors Vanara heroes at the dictate of Brahma to come to 
the aid of Rama in annihilating Ravana. The monkey-like Vanara race is procreated 
by numerous celestials endowing it with peculiar mighty physique and particular 
power to come to the help of Rama.

Chapter: 18

After the completion of Vedic ritual all the kings and Sage Rishyasringa took leave of Dasharatha 
and went away to their countries. After some time Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Shatrughna 
are born. Their virtues in childhood and rituals connected thereto are depicted here. Dasharatha 
then contemplates the marriages of the princes, since marrying sons after completion of education 
is customary. At that juncture Sage Vishvamitra arrives at the court of Dasharatha seeking 
help from the king. Dasharatha receives him adoring in high esteem.

Chapter: 19

Sage Vishvamitra asks King Dasharatha to send Rama to protect the Vedic ritual 
that is being conducted by him, from the demons that are constantly disrupting 
it. The sage asserts King Dasharatha that he and the other sages in Dasharatha's 
court know the capabilities of Rama and though Rama is in his adolescence, he 
can easily kill the demons. But Dasharatha is upset at this request.

Chapter: 20

On enquiring details about those dangerous demons that are ravaging sage's ritual, King Dasharatha 
refuses to send young Rama along with Sage Vishvamitra on many an account, and thus confronts 
the Sage's wrath.

Chapter: 21

The ire of sage Vishvamitra is shown at king Dasharatha. To pacify sage Vishvamitra, 
sage Vashishta intervenes and convinces king Dasharatha to send Rama with sage 
Vishvamitra. While doing so, sage Vashishta enumerates the capabilities of sage 
Vishvamitra, his knowledge of weaponry. Vashishta also suggests that all those 
weapons will be given to Rama, if Rama is dispatched with Vishvamitra. At last, 
Dasharatha agrees to send Rama.

Chapter: 22

King Dasharatha sends Rama and Lakshmana along with Sage Vishvamitra as requested 
by the sage. In their course of travel, Sage Vishvamitra imparts a secret knowledge 
to the young princes Rama and Lakshmana, called bala-atibala- 
vidya-s, by practicing which nothing can wither their vigour and vitality.

Chapter: 23

Rama and Lakshmana proceeding with Vishvamitra sojourn in a hermitage at a place where River 
Ganga and River Sarayu are confluent. Once god Shiva with his third eye burnt down the physical 
entity of Manmatha, the Love-god, at this place.

Chapter: 24

While crossing over the River Ganga, sage Vishvamitra sails them through its confluence with 
River Sarayu, which flows at their capital Ayodhya. The sage leads them to a deadly forest 
on the other bank of River Ganga and narrates about the ambushing nature of demoness Tataka, 
preparing him to kill her.

Chapter: 25

Sage Vishvamitra narrates the birth, marriage and curse of demoness Tataka, and bids Rama 
to eliminate her menace without any hesitation of killing a female, for she is atrocious towards 
the society.

Chapter: 26

Rama encounters his first problem-female demoness Tataka, also called as Taadaka, 
and eliminates her at the orders of sage Vishvamitra. This is a crucial test put 
to Rama by Vishvamitra in ascertaining whether Rama is the follower of dharma through 
elder men's orders or not. Rama eradicates Tataka basing on his own self-confidence.

Chapter: 27

Sage Vishvamitra satisfied with the behaviour of Rama in obliging the 
orders of elders and performing the act that is assigned to him, gives 
many weapons to Rama, called shastra, astra-s. 
The weaponry is categorised mainly into two types. One is
shastra - a handheld weapon like sword, 
lance or mace. The other is astra - a projectile 
missile invoked by reciting hymns. This chapter lists out those missiles 
that are given to Rama and in next chapter an account of some counter-attack 
missiles, called upasamhaaraastra-s is 
given which can be used to nullify the enemy's missiles. In the endnote 
of this chapter some verses describing the nature of
astra-s are incorporated.

Chapter: 28

Rama requests sage Vishvamitra for endowing annulment missiles, besides 
projectile ones that have been accorded in the previous chapter. Sage 
Vishvamitra accords them, and while they are journeying further, they 

chance to see a picturesque forest on their way and Rama enquires about 
it.

Chapter: 29

Rama and Lakshmana inquisitively enquired into the Siddhaashrama, 
Accomplished Hermitage in the earlier chapter for which Sage Vishvamitra 
informs about the heritage of that hermitage for it once belonged to 
Vishnu in Vaamna incarnation. Vishvamitra narrates about it and how 
Vaamna, a dwarfish ascetic boy eradicated evil on earth. It is a suggestion 
to Rama from Sage Vishvamitra to do likewise in this incarnation of Rama also.

Chapter: 30

Rama and Lakshmana while safeguarding the ritual of Sage Vishvamitra for six days 
and nights, on the last night demons named Maareecha and Subaahu come to hinder 
the ritual. Rama acts deftly and hits out Maareecha to a long distance, but kills 
the other, namely Subaahu. Rama thus makes the ritual of sage Vishvamitra a success.

Chapter: 31

Sage Vishwamitra travels to Mithila kingdom to attend a ritual of King Janaka and 
also to see the auspicious bow of Shiva that is being worshipped in the palace of 
Janaka from ages. The other sages suggest to Rama, that he too may go over there 
along with them to see that marvellous bow. They all proceed from Siddha Ashram 
towards River SoNa, a tributary of Ganga, and camp on its bank for a night.

Chapter: 32

Sage Vishvamitra starts to narrate Kusha's legend. Vishvamitra is the 
offspring of Kusha's dynasty. Brahma gives boon to Kusha to beget four 
sons and one among them is Kushanaabha. Kushanabha begets a hundred daughters 
of excellent beauty. When Vayu, Air-god cherishes them all, those girls 
refuse him, as they prefer an arranged marriage by their father. Then 
Air-god in his indignation disfigures them all.

Chapter: 33

Daughters of Kushanaabha report about the Air-god's mischief. Pleased 
at their behaviour Kushanaabha thinks and arranges for their marriage 
with Brahmadatta, a saintly king. After the marriage, by the touch of 
hand of Brahmadatta the girls are rid of their misshapen bodies and 
they again become great beauties.

Chapter: 34

Vishvamitra narrates about the birth of Gaadhi, his own father and the son of Kushanaabha. 
Incidentally he narrates about the emergence and prominence of River Kaushiki, who 
is Vishwamitra's elder sister turned out as a sacred River.

Chapter: 35

Sage Vishvamitra along with others reach the banks of River Ganga and 
they make their sojourn on that riverbank. There when Rama inquisitively 
enquires about River Ganga Vishvamitra narrates the legend of Ganga, 
as to how she is taken to heavens by gods from her father Himalayas.

Chapter: 36

Shiva on his marriage with Uma is in the conjugal bliss for a long period 
due to his yogic powers. Fearing the result of that prolonged activity 
all gods pray for the cessation of it because none in any world can 
carry that offspring. Shiva accepting that request asks them where to 
discharge the sperm that has already stirred up. Gods indicate the earth 
as the taker. Shiva accordingly inundates the earth with his fluid. 
Then the Fire-god is dispatched to consolidate that into a reed forest 
called sharavaNa . Goddess Uma ireful at 
the prevention of begetting a son, now curses gods and earth to be childless.

Chapter: 37

Sage Vishvamitra continues his narration about the earthly course of Ganga, her 
begetting Kaartikeya, Krittika-stars breast-feeding that boy, gods naming that 
boy as Kaarthikeya, and that boy's anointment as the Chief of Celestial Armies.

Chapter: 38

Sage Vishvamitra narrates the legend of Sagara, the earliest King of 
Ayodhya and Rama's forefather, who is childless, but who begets 
sixty thousand sons of merit and one son of demerit. Emperor Sagara 
is the one who brought celestial Ganga onto the surface of earth..

Chapter: 39

The ritual horse released by Emperor Sagara is snatched away by Indra 
in order to cause hindrance to the ritual. The ritual cannot proceed 
to culmination without the horse. Then Sagara orders his sixty thousand 
sons to search for that horse, asking them to dig earth to trace it, 
if it is not found on earth. And the princes will dig earth when they 
have not found the horse on earth, to the grief of beings living in 
netherworlds.

Chapter: 40

Sage Vishwamitra's narration of Sagara's legend is continued. Sagara's 
sons dig out all the quarters of earth and when they enter northeast 
to find out the horse thief, there they find Sage Kapila, i.e., Vishnu 
in the semblance of a sage. When they wanted to attack that sage Kapila, 
he renders them to heaps of ashes by his yogic powers.

Chapter: 41

Amshuman's search for horse reveals that Kapila rendered his paternal-uncles 
to ashes. When he wanted to offer water oblation as obsequies to their 
souls he did not find water. Then Garuda, the Eagle-vehicle of Vishnu 
and maternal uncle of Amshuman advises him to get River Ganga onto earth 
whereby the souls are cleansed and they go to heaven. Amshuman reports 
the same to King Sagara, but Sagara not finding any way to get River 
Ganga onto earth departs to heaven at the end of his time.

Chapter: 42

Bhageeratha's effort for bringing Ganga to earth is fulfilled. Amshuman 
and his son Dileepa could not make any effort to bring the divine river 
to earth. But Bhageeratha, the son of Dileepa, staunch at heart tries 
earnestly to get her onto earth. Brahma agreeing for this descent of 
Ganga designates lord Shiva to bear the burden of the onrush of Ganga, 
because the earth cannot sustain it.

Chapter: 43

Ganga descends to earth by the extraordinary effort of Bhageeratha. 
Shiva agrees to the alighting of Ganga on His head and from where she 
is released into a lake called Bindu sarovar, and from there she flows 
in seven courses. On land Bhageeratha ushers her up to netherworld dug 
by his ancestors where heaps of ashes of his grandparents are there, 
and she enters accordingly to inundate those mounds of ashes according 
salvation to the souls.

Chapter: 44

Brahma commends Bhageeratha in bringing Ganga onto earth which none 
of his ancestors could do. Brahma blesses Ganga to be the daughter of 
Bhageeratha. Brahma advises him to offer water-oblations to his manes 
with the sanctified waters of Ganga.

Chapter: 45

The legend of churning Milk Ocean is narrated to Rama and Lakshmana when they reach 
and see a city named Vishaala. Vishvamitra narrates how haalaahala, the 
lethal poison as well as Amrita, the ambrosial elixir emerged from the 
churning of Milk Ocean, and how Shiva contained the poison and how Vishnu helped 
the churning in His incarnation as Tortoise.

Chapter: 46

Diti seeks for a son to kill Indra because Indra and other gods have 
killed her sons in the battle after churning Milk Ocean. But Indra, 
being her stepson arrives at her place of asceticism, with view to destroy 
that Indra-killer. On a fateful day when Diti failed to maintain the 
procedure of vow, Indra enters her womb and dissects the foetus into 
seven fragments, which later become saptamarudgaNa-s, The Seven Wind-gods.

Chapter: 47
The legend of Seven-Maruts, the Seven-Wind gods, and the legend of the kings of Vishaala 
are narrated to Rama and Lakshmana, while Vishvamitra is narrating the legend of Vishaala. At the request 
of Diti, Indra blesses the seven segments of her foetus to become saptamarudgaNa-s, 
Seven Wind gods, and the place where the legend of Indra-Diti has happened, that province 
later became the City of Vishaala.

Chapter: 48

Vishvamitra narrates the legend of Ahalya to Rama and Lakshmana when 
they arrive at the precincts of Mithila, bidding farewell to the King 
of Vishaala. Indra is infatuated with Ahalya desires a union with her, 
for which she complies. However, Gautama catching them unawares curses 
both Indra and Ahalya.

Chapter: 49

Ahalya is redeemed from her curse when Rama enters their hermitage. 
Vishvamitra while continuing the narration of the legend of Ahalya asks 
Rama to enter her hermitage where Ahalya is living unseen by anybody. 
When once Rama steps into that hermitage she manifests herself from 
her accursed invisible state. She emerges with her divine form and accords 
guestship to Rama and Lakshmana. Sage Gautama also arrives at this juncture 
to accept his depurated wife Ahalya.

Chapter: 50

Rama arrives at Mithila along with Lakshmana led on by Vishvamitra. On hearing that Vishvamitra has 
arrived at their city Mithila, King Janaka proceeds to him welcomingly. On seeing Rama and Lakshmana 
near at Vishvamitra, Janaka inquisitively asks Vishvamitra about these two princes. Vishvamitra announces 
them as the sons of Dasharatha and informs about the adventurous deeds the boys have undertaken.

Chapter: 51

Enquiring about his father Gautama's reuniting with his mother Ahalya, Sage Shataananda 
relates the legend of Vishvamitra. Shataananda greets Rama for his adherence to 
the rectitude of Vishvamitra, which Vishvamitra gained through a series of self-important 
exploits, when he was a great king at one time. Shataananda finds worth in informing 
the biography of Vishvamitra to Rama, because too much of overbearing of kings, 
as has been done by Vishvamitra, will be unbecoming for kings.

Chapter: 52

Vashishta offers hospitality to Vishvamitra and his armies. Even though the King Vishvamitra is 
disinclined to pressurise a hermit with such a burdensome affair of hospitality to hosts, Vashishta 
entreats the king to accept. Vishvamitra had to oblige the same. Vashishta summons his do-all Divine 
Sacred Cow, Shabala, also known as Kaamadhenu, requests her to generate heaps of tasteful foodstuffs 
for a royal banquet as well as for military rations.

Chapter: 53

Vishvamitra tries to gain Kaamadhenu, but Sage Vashishta persistently refuses Vishvamitra's bargains 
and barters. 'When an ordinary cow alone is held sacred and it is an un-marketable commodity, how then 
can Shabala, a milker of any wish, be given away or bartered for other riches...' is the argument of 
Vashishta. Yet, Vishvamitra goes on his bidding, but in vain.

Chapter: 54

The seizure of Kaamadhenu, the Sacred Cow, causes anxiety in her and she urges Vashishta 
to counteract the atrocity of Vishvamitra. Agreeing to her, the sage asks the Cow 
to create a force that can subdue the forces of Vishvamitra. Accordingly, that Cow 
generates newer forces and a war ensues.


Chapter: 55

Vishvamitra ruins Vashishta's hermitage on acquiring missiles at the grace of God Shiva by practising 
a paramount ascesis. When the forces generated by Wish-Milker Sacred Cow, namely Kaamadhenu, have eliminated 
Vishvamitra's army and his hundred sons, he felt indignant and pray Shiva for bestowal of unusual missiles. 
On getting them, he again comes to Sage Vashishta's hermitage and ruins it completely. Then extremely 
infuriated Sage Vashishta resorts to his Brahma-baton to confront Vishvamitra.

Chapter: 56

Vashishta nullifies Vishvamitra's missiles just by his Brahma's baton. All missiles 
are defused when Vashishta consumed them. Vishvamitra launches the highest missile, 
namely Brahma-missile, which too is consumed by Vashishta, whereby the body of Vashishta 
becomes a Brahma missile and starts to emit radiation. Then, upon the prayer of 
gods and saints, Vashishta withdraws the effect of that missile. Vishvamitra on 
seeing this concludes that mere missiles are of no use and thus he embarks on a 
sublime ascesis for Brahma-hood.

Chapter: 57

The legend of Trishanku is narrated to Rama, which forms a part of Vishvamitra's 
legend. When Brahma blesses Vishvamitra to be a kingly-saint, rather 
than a Brahman-saint, Vishvamitra continues his ascesis in southerly 
parts of country. In the meantime, one king named Trishanku desired 
to go to heaven with mortal body and approaches Vashishta who rejects 
that very suggestion. Then that king approaches the sons of the same 
Vashishta with the same idea.

Chapter: 58

Trishanku seeks shelter of Vishvamitra when the sons of Vashishta rebuffed him, and even cursed him 
to become a profaner. Narrating his sad tale and his idealistic idea of going to heaven with mortal 
body, Trishanku earnestly appeals to Vishvamitra.

Chapter: 59

Vishvamitra undertakes Trishanku's Vedic ritual and sends disciples to invite all Vedic-scholars. Many 
sages have come except for Vashishta and his sons. Further, the sons of Vashishta have ridiculed this 
ritual of Vishvamitra and Trishanku. Vishvamitra gets irritated and hurls curses at the sons of Vashishta.

Chapter: 60

Vishvamitra effectuates Trishanku's travel to heaven, but Indra throws him down as Trishanku has not 
acquired any merit to reach heaven. Vishvamitra enraged at this starts to replicate universe with constellation 
of stars and galaxies, and he proceeds to clone even gods. On seeing this chaotic situation, Indra with 
gods yield to the pertinence of Vishvamitra and allow that which Vishvamitra replicated to survive and 
also allow Trishanku to inhibit that pseudo Creation, but with an upside down posture.

Chapter: 61

The Legend of Shunashepa is commenced and Sage Shataananda continues this as a part 
of Vishvamitra's legend. When Rama's grandparent Ambariisha undertook a ritual, 
Indra impounds that ritual's horse. Then Ambariisha had to fetch a human-animal 
in lieu of that lost horse. When none is available one named Shunashepa, son of 
Sage Riciika, and a nephew of Vishvamitra, offers himself with a barter of riches 
to his parents.

Chapter: 62

Sage Vishvamitra curses his sons as they defy his orders and accords two esoteric 
hymns to Shunashepa, for chanting them in the Vedic-ritual of Ambariisha. Shunashepa 
gets longevity on chanting those hymns. Thus Vishvamitra not only creates another 
universe as in Trishanku's episode, he even accords longevity, or even deathlessness 
to mortals by his ascetic power. Such as he is, he is the mentor of Rama, and hence 
Sage Shataananda informs Rama about the capabilities of his own mentor, Vishvamitra, 
in these many episodes.

Chapter: 63

On Vishvamitra's performing severe ascesis Brahma accords the sageship of 'Great-sage' 
to him, whereas Vishvamitra's ambition is to acquire the sageship of a 'Brahma-sage' 
Absolute-sageship. In the meanwhile, the celestial wench Menaka arrives at that 
place and Vishvamitra is enticed by her beauty and spends some years with her. Later, 
on realising the he should have won over lust, he further undertakes severe ascesis, 
by which gods are perturbed.

Chapter: 64

Vishvamitra curses Rambha, the celestial wench, knowing that she arrived at the behest of Indra to cause 
hindrance to his ascesis. But later feels ashamed to loose his tongue and then he is determined to undertake 
another round of ascesis to conquer is own senses.

Chapter: 65

Vishvamitra becomes Brahma-sage after a prolonged ascesis that made all the worlds 
to startle. All gods request Brahma to accord the supreme Brahma-sageship on Vishvamitra 
as he is cleansed of all mortal impurities, and Brahma accords that highest order 
on him. Thus Sage Shataananda concludes his narration about the legend of Vishvamitra.

Chapter: 66

Legend of Shiva's bow is narrated as Vishvamitra asks Janaka to show that bow to 
Rama and Lakshmana, as they have come this far to have a glimpse of that great bow. 
Janaka, while narrating its history, makes an offer saying that his daughter Seetha 
will be given in marriage, if only Rama can string the bowstring of Shiva's bow. 
In the very same sixty-sixth chapter of Kishkindha Kanda, Valmiki narrates the birth 
of Hanuma through Jambavanta, elaborately. But here Valmiki informs through Janaka 
about the nature of birth of Seetha, very concisely, which gave raise to too much 
of debate about this enigmatic Seetha and her birth. Some points are given in the 
endnote.

Chapter: 67

Rama breaks Shiva's bow when he wanted to examine the tautness of its
bowstring. Janaka is perplexed, while others swooned at the blast of breaking bow, and
Janaka proposes Seetha to Rama in marriage. On the approval of Vishvamitra to that
proposal, Janaka sends his plenipotentiaries to Ayodhya.

Chapter: 68

Janaka's delegation arrives at Ayodhya and submits its message to Dasharatha. Listening 
to the tidings that his son Rama not only lifted the bow of Shiva, but broke it 
as well, Dasharatha is overjoyed and refers the matter of marriage of Seetha with 
Rama to his ministers and teachers. All of the ministers and sages unanimously agree 
to that proposal and they are set to travel to Mithila the next day.

Chapter: 69

Dasharatha arrives at Mithila and Janaka receives him reverentially, as he belongs 
to a crowning dynasty, called Ikshvaku-s. Then, after the usual exchange of royal 
pleasantries and protocol, all of them stay in Mithila comfortably.

Chapter: 70

Ikshvaku's bloodline is narrated as custom demands to enquire into the bridegroom's lineage. Vashishta narrates this to 
other Kushadhvaja, who is also summoned to participate in the wedding celebrations, and who later has to 
offer his two daughters to Bharata and Shatrughna. This listing and eulogising ancestors is an adjunctive custom in Indian 
marriages. Nowadays it is limited to cite only three preceding generations, instead of narrating from the first, since nobody 
holds his family tree, ready at hand.

Chapter: 71

Janaka narrates his lineage while offering his daughters as brides to Rama and Lakshmana. In doing so, he elaborates 
more about his brother Kushadhvaja, whose daughters are the would-be-wives of Bharata and Shatrughna. They even 
fix the timings for marriage.

Chapter: 72

Vishvamitra proposes the marriages of Bharata ad Shatrughna with the two daughters of Kushadhvaja, the younger 
brother of Janaka. This being a welcome offer, Janaka accords his immediate consent. Then Dasharatha proceeds 
with the initiatory rituals for the bridegrooms and donates cows and riches.

Chapter: 73


Chapter: 74

Parashu Rama confronts the wedding party that is returning to Ayodhya from
Mithila. On his very entry, the atmosphere becomes pell-mell and a whirlwind ensues.
Expecting some problem from this Parashu Rama, the sages like Vashishta and others starts
to receive him in a peaceable manner. Not caring anyone around Parashu Rama starts a
dialogue with Dasharatha Rama.

Chapter: 75

The visitant Parashu Rama narrates the legends of bows of Vishnu and Shiva to Rama. Unheedful of the request of Dasharatha 
to spare his sons, Parashu Rama addresses Dasharatha Rama directly and asks him to take an aim with the longbow of Vishnu, 
and if Dasharatha Rama is capable to do so, Parashu Rama says that he will give a duel to him.

Chapter: 76

Rama takes aim with Vishnu's longbow and asks Parashu Rama to choose the target to release the arrow, as arrow 
of that bow cannot go astray. Parashu Rama opts for elimination of his ascetic merit and heavenly realms thereby. 
Rama releases the bow annihilating that merit and after that, Parashu Rama retreats into oblivion.

Chapter: 77

The wedding party arrives at Ayodhya on the exit of Parashu Rama. Yudhaajit, the maternal uncle of Bharata, 
who came before marriages, now takes Bharata and Shatrughna to his kingdom. Rama and Lakshmana from then on 
are engaged in the welfare works of their subjects, at the behest of their father. Rama and Seetha will then 
enter the threshold of their blissful married life.

