Chapter: 1

Rama in his pursuit to regain Seetha reaches Pampa Lake along with Lakshmana. Rama visualises Pampa 
Lake as a heavenly abode and narrates to Lakshmana the suffering he is undergoing due to the departure 
of Seetha, i.e., the departure of innate soul from the Supreme. Seetha is the alter ego of Rama, either 
in heaven or on earth. In heavens she is Goddess Lakshmi and she incarnates herself as Seetha on earth. 
In the first chapter of Kishkindha Kanda the elaborate description of Pampa Lake and its surroundings 
is to be taken as a two-fold narration, one pertaining to Divinity, the other to Rama, the human. The 
area of Pampa Lake metaphors with heavens, and its trees and birds with divine souls, and who incidentally 
are teachers too. The fragrant breeze metaphors with god's gift, flowers as pure knowers and knowledge, 
and the tranquil water as clear heart and so on. Rama as hero of the epic is in search of Seetha. Rama 
as god incarnate is also in search of true devotees who are entrapped in the bodies of living beings. 
The true devotees are the trees, birds, flowers, waters and other naturals except the humans who cherish 
the earthly comforts. Thus Rama's sorrowing over Seetha and Bharata is in similitude with the god's 
sorrowing for the true devotees, who needs salvation from the birth and death cycle. Hence the god incarnate 
Rama is in search of true devotee like Seetha, who is now in a distant place and needs some education 
about her release from the embodiment in Lanka. Later Rama finds Hanuma, the teacher, who will be deputed, 
to Seetha to enlighten her about her release. In the last two chapters of Aranya Kanda there will be 
some 61 verses detailing about Pampa Lake and Rama's love for Seetha. But in Gorakhpur and Eastern recessions 
there are 130 verses in this first canto of Kishkindha and some 20 verses in the fag end chapter of 
Aranya canto. In these many verses Rama expresses his deep-rooted emotion for Seetha, which the ancient 
commentators have interpreted to be the God's deep-seated love and anguish for the created souls. The 
comparison is, Rama to Vishnu, Seetha to the created soul, now captivated in the embodiment called Lanka, 
and Lakshmana as the true devout. God needs a messenger or a Messiah or as per Hindu tradition the Guru, 
the teacher. That is what Hanuma. Rama as a god incarnate is actually in search of a true teacher, for 
which the surroundings of Pampa Lake are exemplified as good surroundings for finding such a true teacher. 
As far as possible, the commentaries of ancients are given in comment section of those verses. At the 
fag end of this chapter, the mighty monkey hero Sugreeva, moving on the Rishyamuka Mountain sees Rama 
and Lakshmana entering into his territory, flees into deep forests, fearing them to be enemies.

Chapter: 2

Hanuma, the Marvellous Monkey of Ramayana is entered in this chapter. The very first assurance given 
by Sage Valmiki through Hanuma, to one and all is, "Be Fearless..." Even today that assurance of Hanuma 
is ruling high on the Hindu psyche and Hanuma is to be remembered in any event of fright.

Chapter: 3

Hanuma, at the behest of Sugreeva, approaches Rama and Lakshmana in the guise of an ascetic. The reason 
to change his original form to that of a sanyasi is that, the intruders in this area Rama and Lakshmana 
appear in a self-contradictory personage. By their body built, striking features, wielding armoury they 
look like kings or emperors. But when it comes to their dress and hairdo, they are almost like hermits. 
Sugreeva is well aware of political milieu and enemy's tactics, and thus asked Hanuma not to approach 
them in his original monkey form in earlier chapter. Equally well, Rama and Lakshmana doubt the entry 
of an ascetic i.e., Hanuma in that guise, into this uninhabited place, and they wait cautiously till 
Hanuma reveals himself. From here up to Sundara Kanda, Hanuma's words and actions are weighted, and 
need an in-depth study. In this episode, what all Hanuma says is drawn from scriptures and political 
science, and what all Rama analyses Hanuma, by way of Hanuma's expressiveness, is relevant to scriptures, 
i.e., Veda-s. In mythology, Hanuma is taken as the veda vedaanga paarangataH, 
knower of all Vedas, and their subsidiary scriptures, nava vyaakarana panditaH, 
scholar in nine schools of grammars, buddhimata variSTaH , cleverest of 
the clever. He is the supreme scholar, teacher, and the cleverest.

Chapter: 4
Lakshmana explains about Seetha's abduction and their inability to trace her
whereabouts. As informed earlier by a demon freed from his curse and who became a celestial,
Lakshmana says that they are searching for one Sugreeva, King of Vanmara-s, to befriend him in
order to take help in searching for Seetha. Hanuma who is on a similar mission to befriend these
two warriors, as instructed by Sugreeva in the earlier chapter, comes to a conclusion that the
needs of both the friends would be fulfilled. Then Hanuma takes the two bothers on his back to the
place where Sugreeva is hiding from Vali.

Chapter: 5

Hanuma fetches Rama and Lakshmana to Sugreeva, and advises him to befriend Rama. Accordingly Rama and 
Sugreeva take the oath of friendship before an altar of fire and Rama assures to eliminate Vali the 
vice, from the face of earth.

Chapter: 6
After befriending Rama Sugreeva promises him to bring back Seetha from whatever
place she is held captive. He informs that he has seen Seetha travelling overhead in the sky while
being abducted. He also says that the lady while being abducted has dropped her ornaments wrapping
in her upper cloth at their place atop the mountain. Then Sugreeva shows the ornaments to Rama
asking him to identify them. Rama recognises the ornaments and the upper cloth of Seetha, and
angered at the scandalous act of abduction he avows to eradicate that demon along with his
clansmen.

Chapter: 7
Sugreeva consoles Rama soothingly and advises him to come out of his frenzy emotion
at the loss of Seetha, which is not befitting to a person like Rama. Rama recovering from his
emotional state, promises Sugreeva to be truthful to his word in alleviating the fear of Vali for
Sugreeva. And Sugreeva also promises to make all his efforts to search for Seetha.

Chapter: 8
Sugreeva gives a report to Rama about his plight for fear of Vali, who made his own
brother an enemy and abducted Sugreeva's wife. Rama asks Sugreeva to inform him about the real
cause of enmity, so that he can decide correctly. Sugreeva narrates his woeful condition.

Chapter: 9
Sugreeva reports the incident that sparked off the indignation and ire of Vali
towards Sugreeva. Sugreeva describes to Rama about the strength and heartless nature of Vali, with
a kind of indirect portrayal of his enemy's capabilities.

Chapter: 10
Sugreeva informs Rama that Vali could not be appeased in spite of repeated requests
as he is resolved to accept Sugreeva as an enemy. Vali banishes Sugreeva from the kingdom with the
same thinking.

Chapter: 11
Sugreeva narrates Vali's bravery and intrepidity in fighting and how he fought with
a mountainous buffalo demon named Dundubhi. Also narrated is the curse of Sage Matanga that
prohibited Vali's entrance into Mt. Rishyamuka area.In order to imbibe confidence in Sugreeva, Rama
starts to show his valour and might.

Chapter: 12
Rama to imbue confidence in Sugreeva hurtles his arrow that penetrates seven sala
trees and also the subterranean planes of earth and returns into his quiver. Sugreeva obliging the
prowess of Rama submits himself to Rama, who encourages Sugreeva to challenge Vali for a duel.
Accordingly a duel ensues wherein Vali assaults Sugreeva and chases him off. Battered and
belittled, Sugreeva implores upon Rama why he did not come to his rescue. Rama apologetically
states that he could not make out difference between the two brothers for they are alike. Rama asks
Sugreeva to wear a garland and again challenge Vali, so with that identification of garland he
could aim his arrow at the other dueller. Again they all advance towards Kishkindha for the duel
with Vali.

Chapter: 13

After encouraging Sugreeva to challenge Vali for a second time duly wearing a flower garland as a mark 
of identification between the two brothers, Rama and others proceed to Kishkindha. On their way they 
chance to see a divine hermitage called sapta jana aashrama 'Hermitage 
of Seven Sages.' On worshipping it they proceed to Kishkindha.

Chapter: 14
Sugreeva again requests Rama to ascertain whether he is prepared to eliminate Vali
this time. Rama assures Sugreeva that he will not deviate from what he has promised, and he never
would, and asks Sugreeva to challenge Vali by way of inviting him for a duel. Sugreeva blares out
inciting Vali to the duel.

Chapter: 15
Lady Tara is entered here. She is the granddaughter of Brihaspati, the Jupiter and
wife of Vali and she is one of the exemplary females in this epic. She is entered only thrice in
the vast of this epic, presently here, next at the fall of Vali and later to pacify the ire of
Lakshmana. But her personality for analytical intelligence does not exit from the minds of readers.
Here she advises Vali not to confront Sugreeva, as long as Rama stands guard to him. Further she
says after a logical discourse and reasons, why not Sugreeva be made the Prince Regent of
Kishkindha, even at this juncture, where she foresees a calamity to Vali. But Vali, maddened in his
intellect by his brawny might slights her far fetching advice.

Chapter: 16

Vali dismissing Tara's words, who is dissuading him to confront Rama, starts out to fight out Sugreeva. 
A ghastly fight ensues in which Vali depletes Sugreeva's strength by the boon and Indra's chest-plate, 
and thus Sugreeva seeks Rama's help. Rama shoots his arrow which hits Vali on chest, but does not render 
him dead immediately. Thus that great mighty and unassailable Vali is brought down to ground.

Chapter: 17

Rama's arrow hits Vali on chest and Vali fallen down. But Vali is not dead yet. When Rama and Lakshmana 
approach dying Vali, he questions the propriety of Rama in killing him. Vali's questioning explicitly 
is straightforward befitting to the defeated mighty Vanara King. But implicitly, there are ancient commentaries 
that deduce many more meanings in picturising Vali as a devotee of Rama, who wanted to die at the hand 
of Rama, like Viraadha and others, as a means of salvation.

Chapter: 18

Rama explains to dying Vali as to why he gave such a punishment. Rama categorically explains all the 
question put by Vali in the last chapter from the viewpoint of scriptures that lay down principle for
sanaatana dharma, eternal tradition, as well as raaja dharma, king's duty. Vali finally 
concludes that there is someone superior to him and thus seeks refuge in Rama.

Chapter: 19

Lady Tara rushes out to reach her slain husband while the monkey generals seek of her to anoint Angada 
as king immediately or leave Kishkindha, for Sugreeva and his men may come occupying the city. She chides 
their advises away and proceeds to meet Vali. She arrives at that place, sees Rama and his brother Lakshmana, 
her husband Vali and his brother Sugreeva. She faints and wails for the departing soul of Vali.

Chapter: 20
Tara's lamentation for her departing husband Vali. She unlike other forest beings
who just forsake the dead partner, weeps bitterly for Vali and holds Sugreeva and Rama responsible
for the untimely death of Vali. The common nature of humans is portrayed through the Vanara
empress.

Chapter: 21

Hanuma tries to console Tara. He asserts that Angada will not be looked down. Though Vali is put to 
his plight, Hanuma says, that Tara alone is the empress to lead Kishkindha kingdom. But Tara prefers 
self-immolation along with her husband Vali.

Chapter: 22
Vali recovers from his swoon and gives his parting messages to Sugreeva and Angada.
He also gives his miraculous pendant, given by his father Indra, to Sugreeva and asks him to assume
authority of Kishkindha kingdom, for he won it in this fight. Angada is advised to conduct
appropriately for he is becoming a father-less son now. Then Vali breathes his last to pave the way
for Seetha's search.

Chapter: 23

Tara's lamentation is narrated in here. Seeing at her departed husband Vali, Tara pitiably wails for 
his demise as any ordinary woman would.

Chapter: 24

Sugreeva and Tara lament Vali's death. Sugreeva seeks permission of Rama to enter the funeral pyre of 
his brother Vali to self-immolate himself for his wrongdoing in getting his own brother killed. Tara 
asks Rama to kill her with the same arrow with which Vali is killed, so that she too can go to heavens 
to meet her husband.

Chapter: 25

Rama hurries up Sugreeva to proceed with the funeral ceremony of Vali instead of sitting around the 
body and wailing endlessly. Rama tersely tells about living being's dependency on the eternal Time, 
Fate and the Absolute. Then Sugreeva takes charge of the situation and arranges for the monarchical 
funeral to Vali. At the final departure of her husband, Tara again laments. Ultimately Vali's body is 
committed to fire for his voyage to heavens on a remote avenue.

Chapter: 26

Hanuma proposes that the coronation of Sugreeva is to be performed under the aegis of Rama. But Rama says that 
he cannot enter villages or cities during exile, and asks the chiefs of monkeys to perform the same. Rama also 
suggests that Angada may also be crowned as crown prince. Accordingly, Sugreeva is anointed as king and Angada 
as crown prince of Kishkindha. The regal splendour of the coronation is narrated in here.

Chapter: 27
After Sugreeva's enthronement, Rama and Lakshmana arrive at a mountain called
Prasavana for their stay during rainy season. This mountain contains rich flora and fauna as
extolled by Rama. On seeing the beauty of nature Rama's thoughts wander over Seetha and he sinks
down in his anguish. But Lakshmana comes to rescue imbuing hopeful thoughts in retrieving her with
the help of Sugreeva.

Chapter: 28

Rama eulogises the rainy season for a heavenly elixir is showered for all the living beings. This is one among 
the other eulogies to seasons. On this narration about rainy season, there are extensive commentaries by the ancient 
commentators as rainy season occupies a prime ordeal status among other seasons, and some of them are included 
here.

Chapter: 29

Sugreeva on his enthronement and gaining an interval of rainy reason, lapses into lavish enjoyment of sensual 
pleasures. His indulgence becomes overindulgence and makes him to forget his promise-oriented duty to search for 
Seetha. As an intelligent minister, Hanuma approaches Sugreeva and enlightens Sugreeva about his duty for the 
requital of help rendered by Rama. Ordering Niila, a commander of monkey forces, for foregathering all monkey 
troops within fifteen days, Sugreeva re-enters his palace-chambers, dragged by his sensual pleasures.

Chapter: 30
Rama's exaltation of sharad R^itu post-rainy or
pre-autumnal season is the theme here. This season, which will be conducive to lovers, is painful
to Rama in the absence of Seetha. This agony is compounding and turning into his ire, since
Sugreeva's efforts in searching for Seetha are neither seen nor heard. Hence, Rama sends Lakshmana
as an envoy to Kishkindha to decide whether Sugreeva's support is there or liquefied in the spree
of his drinking and merrymaking.

Chapter: 31
Enraged Lakshmana goes to the extent of saying that Sugreeva is to be eliminated and
then Angada and others will search for Seetha. Perturbed by his brother's vehemence Rama pacifies
him and sends to Kishkindha where on seeing the infuriated, hissing, snakelike Lakshmana monkeys
are upset. Lakshmana sends Angada to Sugreeva to inform about his arrival. Sugreeva could not
comprehend firstly because he is in an inebriated condition, but later comes to senses on the
advise of his ministers.

Chapter: 32

Sugreeva is disturbed at the unfounded anger of Lakshmana and wanted his ministers to elicit the cause for that 
anger. Hanuma informs Sugreeva that causing delay is the only fault of Sugreeva, for which Sugreeva is advised 
to pray for the mercy of Lakshmana personally.

Chapter: 33

The magnificence and luxury of Kishkindha and its inmates is depicted here. Lakshmana on the invitation of Angada 
proceeds through the streets of the city examining its glory. On reaching palace-chambers, feeling shy to enter 
inside where the women are moving about and also infuriated at Sugreeva's callousness, Lakshmana makes a thunderous 
noise with his bowstring. Listening that sound Sugreeva is terrorised and bids Tara to approach Lakshmana to pacify 
him. Accordingly, Tara approaches Lakshmana and pacifies his anger and invites him to their palace.

Chapter: 34
Lakshmana enters the interior of Sugreeva's chamber. Sugreeva finding him there is
alarmed and approaches him in all his humbleness. Then Lakshmana chastens Sugreeva with harsh words
and cautions him to face the wrath of the arrows of Rama.

Chapter: 35

Tara appeases Lakshmana and reasons with him about the delay, which is held as delay by Rama, but in actuality 
it is the preparatory time lag. She gives an account o Ravana's forces that cannot be countered without proper 
assistance of Vanara military. She informs Lakshmana that all the Vanara forces are mobilized and they present 
themselves before Rama on this very day.

Chapter: 36
Sugreeva's apology pacifies Lakshmana. On knowing that Lakshmana is pacified by
Tara's reasoning Sugreeva makes his apologetic statement and affirms his support to Rama. Then
Lakshmana's rage comes to a halt and he too is appeased by the open declaration of Sugreeva about
his adherence to Rama, and Lakshmana asks him to come to Rama.

Chapter: 37
Monkey chiefs go round the earth at the behest of Sugreeva, to fetch all the monkey
champions on earth to the presence of Sugreeva. They all go to different mountain, rivers, oceans,
and forests and motivate all monkeys to reach Sugreeva at once. Further, having gone to Himalayas
they find divine fruits, tubers and medicinal herbs there, which they fetch as royal gifts to
Sugreeva. They all return to Sugreeva in the same time when Sugreeva is with Lakshmana and prior to
the other monkeys that are summoned.

Chapter: 38

Sugreeva approaches Rama and falls prostrate on Rama's feet as though seeking pardon for the delay. Rama gets 
him up and mildly admonishes him. Then Sugreeva while giving the account of legions that are coming in, informs 
Rama that all the Vanara armies on earth are coming for confronting Ravana in battle. On asserting that Sugreeva 
is at his job, Rama is pleased heartily.

Chapter: 39

Millions and millions of monkeys arrive with their troop-leaders to the control of Sugreeva. Rama's intent to 
wage war with Ravana is informed to Sugreeva. And Sugreeva who is interested for requital of the help rendered 
by Rama informs that all the monkeys on earth are ushered to remain in the service of Rama. While Sugreeva is 
informing about the arrival of monkeys, in a split-second that place is further crammed up with troops and troops 
of monkey-warriors.

Chapter: 40

Sugreeva orders vanara-s to search east under the leadership of Vinata, a mighty vanara. Firstly he dedicates 
all the vanara forces to Rama, but Rama desired to know whether Seetha is alive or not, and if so at what place. 
Then Sugreeva commissioning Vinata explains the topography and geography of Eastern side of the
jambuu dwiipa, 'the Indian subcontinent,' and its eastward, comprising whole of South-East 
Asia. This is the first chronicle ever recorded about the lands and oceans, islands and dwellers in there, as 
far as Ancient Indian Geography is concerned.

Chapter: 41
Sugreeva sends Vanara-s to southward which troop includes Hanuma, Jambavanta, Niila
and others and Angada is its leader. Sugreeva gives a vivid picture of the southern side of Jambu
dviipa up to the south-most part of passable regions, next to which the abode of Yama, the
Terminator is there. This troop is also given one month's time to find the whereabouts of
Seetha.

Chapter: 42
Sugreeva sends troops to west side to search for Seetha under the leadership of
Sushena, the father of lady Tara. Describing the various and magnificent mountains that are
situated at the northwest of India, and also the ocean down south to it, namely the present Arabian
Sea and almost up to Persian provinces, he orders monkey troops to return within one month's
time.

Chapter: 43
Sugreeva sends troops to north in search of Seetha. He gives an account of the snowy
regions and provinces of northern side and asks them to search in the places of Yavana, Kuru, and
Darads etc., civilisations. Sugreeva specially informs them about a divine province called Uttara
Kuru and a heavenly mountain called Mt. Soma on which Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva make sojourn for its
sacredness.

Chapter: 44

Rama gives ring to Hanuma as a memorabilia enabling Seetha to recognise Hanuma without dismay. Sugreeva holds 
Hanuma's capabilities very high and reposes full confidence in him for locating Seetha. On seeing Sugreeva assigning 
the task to Hanuma, Rama perceives that Hanuma alone can achieve results and thus hands over his ring to Hanuma. 
Then Hanuma starts on the expedition with others.

Chapter: 45
The war cries of monkey soldiers in their enthusiasm to conquer Ravana are uttered
in the audience of Sugreeva, when all of them started to their designated directions. This suggests
the sugriiva aaj~na 'the inviolable order of Sugreeva.'

Chapter: 46

Sugreeva's knowledge of physical world is acquired when Vali put him to flight. Rama enquires with Sugreeva as 
to how Sugreeva has many details of lands, countries, rivers, and mountains. In reply, Sugreeva says that when 
repulsed by Vali he was on the run to pillar to post, until he finally settled on Mt. Rishyamuka. During such 
a plighted flight, Sugreeva says, he acquired a direct and personal knowledge of earth.

Chapter: 47
Search for Seetha failed in east, north, and west directions. The monkey chiefs who
went there have come back to inform that she is not found and they all hoped Hanuma to find her
out, because he is pursuing the direction in which Seetha was taken away.

Chapter: 48
Hanuma's search for Seetha, together with Angada and others is started. They search
certain mountains and forests belonging to Vindhya, but in vain. They enter many uninhabited
forests and places. Angada kills a demon presuming him to be Ravana. Their hearts sadden when their
search became futile at these places.

Chapter: 49
Angada encourages all of the monkeys for searching Seetha and it makes those
enervated monkeys to come to their animation. He points out to the wrath of Sugreeva and to its
consequences, if the monkeys fail to implement Sugreeva's directive. Though all are fatigued to
ramble in wildwoods, where even potable water is scarce, they are invigorated by Angada's advises
and again start searching Vindhya ranges, from the beginning.

Chapter: 50
Monkeys enter Riksha cavity, an unsightly and gloomy one, during their search in
southern direction. While groping in that dark they loose time set by Sugreeva. Finally, they see
luminosity and extraordinarily built mansions, woodlands, trees and lakes. Thereupon they catch
sight of an elderly sainted lady and they all approach her asking after the legend of that
cavity.

Chapter: 51
The legend of Black Cave is informed to Hanuma and others by Swayamprabha, the
sainted lady who safeguards the paradisaical creation of a demon named Maya. Maya crafted this cave
as a heaven on earth, for which the infuriated Indra eliminated Maya. Hema, an apsara,
nymphal-virtuoso accords this fantastic creation to Swayamprabha. Swayamprabha offers hospitality
to all the monkeys who entered that cave.

Chapter: 52

Vanara-s deliverance from black hole is effectuated by Sainted Lady Swayamprabha. On listening to Hanuma about 
the plight of monkeys by which they entered this cavity in searching for Seetha, Sainted Lady Swayamprabha becomes 
sympathetic and offers guestship. When entreated by Hanuma for an exit from that incarceration, and as the time 
frame set by Sugreeva is lapsed in this very cavity, Swayamprabha uses her ascetic powers to transport the monkeys 
from that cave, which exit is otherwise impossible for any other intruder, in his aliveness.

Chapter: 53

Angada proposes fast unto death as this troop of monkeys failed to find Seetha, and the timeframe fixed by Sugreeva 
has also lapsed, and if they return to Kishkindha, it is sure that Sugreeva takes them to task. As they are caught 
between the devil and the deep sea, Sugreeva and southern Indian Ocean, they resort to lay their lives by fasting 
unto death.

Chapter: 54

Hanuma advises Angada to not to desert the mainstream kingdom to establish a separate one, which will definitely 
attract the fury of Sugreeva. Hanuma uses political tactics in pacifying Angada, who is utterly terrorised of 
Sugreeva in the event of the failure of the task under his leadership.

Chapter: 55

Monkeys decide to fast unto death as they failed in executing Sugreeva command. Sugreeva already said that anyone 
returning after timeframe might deem himself as dead. Thus, Angada casting aspersions on Sugreeva and his ruthless 
commands, takes this decision on many counts. All the other monkeys follow the suite.

Chapter: 56
Sampaati hears about Jataayu's death when Angada cites it while lamenting for their
misfortune. He praises that Jataayu is better off than the vanara-s for he encountered Ravana and
attained martyrdom. On listening his brother's name and news of his death, Sampaati, who firstly
wanted to gluttonise all the vanara-s, seeks their help to lower him down from mountain heights, to
listen more of his brother Jataayu.

Chapter: 57
Angada informs Sampaati of their plight in searching for Seetha. As a part of it, he
also details the plight of Rama. He explains that Seetha is unseen even after their meticulous
search, thereof they transgressed the order of Sugreeva, thereby they did not return to Kishkindha,
and therefore they resorted to fast-unto-death.

Chapter: 58
Sampaati informs Angada about Seetha, Ravana, and Lanka after narrating his and his
brother Jataayu's flights and plights. Sampaati narrates what he has seen when Seetha was abducted
by Ravana and concludes her to be Seetha for she was incessantly calling for Rama's help. He gives
an account of the lavish city Lanka as an eagle which has seen that city from this shore of ocean,
though he cannot fly as the scorching sun previously burnt both of his wings. Then the returnless
monkeys on getting a bare beacon of indication from the lighthouse called Sampaati, they feel
highly rejoiced on the seashore.

Chapter: 59
Sampaati details his narration telling monkeys as to how he knew the abduction of
Seetha. He says that his son Supaarshva is the eyewitness in her abduction and narrates that
account to monkeys, which his son narrated to him.

Chapter: 60
Sampaati narrates his legend to Angada and others. He explains how he has fallen on
Mt. Vindhya and how he reached a sage called Nishaakara descending Mt. Vindhya with great
difficulty.

Chapter: 61
Sampaati details Sage Nishaakara as to how his wings were burnt, when he and his
brother Jataayu were flying competitively near at the sun. He says that he wanted to commit
suicide, as his two wings, eagle kingdom, valour and even brother, are lost.

Chapter: 62
Sage Nishaakara asks Sampaati to wait for monkeys who arrive at the behest of Rama
in search of Seetha. This sage also accords small wings and vigour to the eagle for survival until
the arrival of harbinger monkeys of Rama, as this eagle has to guide the monkeys towards the
location where Seetha is incarcerated.

Chapter: 63
Sampaati regains his wings when he passes information to the monkeys. Sampaati flies
away for flight-test of his newborn wings wishing the monkeys success. Then the enthused monkeys
journey on to southern direction, as directed by Sampaati.

Chapter: 64

Monkeys on arriving at seashore are awestruck to have a glimpse of unnavigable ocean, which is tumultuous with 
many sea-creatures. Angada noticing the baffle of monkeys pacifies them and elicits information about each monkey's 
capability to jump over the ocean.

Chapter: 65
Monkeys are perturbed to see ocean which is breadthwise a hundred yojana-s, say a
thousand miles, as none can leap a. Every important monkey says that his capability is just lesser
than that. Angada is again despaired as none is coming forward, nor he is allowed to go, in the
name of his prospective kingship. But Jambavanta pacifies and starts to encourage and invigorate
Hanuma to undertake the task of leaping the ocean.

Chapter: 66
Legend of Hanuma's birth is eulogised together with his innate capabilities.
Jambavanta familiarises Hanuma of his capabilities giving an account of his birth, rather what for
he took birth, and extols his unready faculty. In the sixty-sixth chapter of Bala Kanda, Valmiki
very concisely narrates the birth of Seetha. But here Valmiki elaborately informs about the birth
of Hanuma through Jambavanta. Some information about Hanuma is included in the endnote.

Chapter: 67
Hanuma comes forward to leap the ocean at the repeated encouragement given by
Jambavanta. Then he increases his physique, fit enough to take a leap, and starts declaring his
capabilities, by which the other monkeys feel jubilant. Then Hanuma climbs Mt. Mahendra, by which
whole of that mountain is put to turmoil. And he reaches Lanka, instinctually, as he has the speed
of Air-god and of the Thought Process, i.e., mano javam, maaruta tulya
vegam... Thus, with this chapter this book of Kishkindha Kanda, 'The Empire of Holy
Monkeys...' concludes.

