Chapter: 1
This first chapter of Sundara Kanda describes Hanuma's preparations to cross the
ocean in search of Seetha. Mighty Hanuma's flight over the ocean is described in a glorious detail.
Hanuma's encountering of Mainaka, Surasa and Simhika form important phases of His flight.

Chapter: 2


This chapter introduces us to the glorious city of Lanka and Hanuma's first encounter with it. The geography around 
the island where Lanka is located is described herein. The chapter also depicts the initial reaction of Hanuma 
on seeing the city and his initial thoughts about the feasibility of the task of overcoming the Rakshasas and 
Ravana to reunite Sri Rama with mother Seetha. As the book progresses, we shall see how Hanuma overcomes these 
thoughts and moves toward achieving this task.

Chapter: 3
In this chapter Hanuma faces Lanka, the city of Lanka herself in the form of a demoness.

Chapter: 4




Entering Lanka at night by placing His left foot desiring the destruction of
enemies, Hanuma hears various musical instruments being played upon inside. He also observes
enemies' forces and moves towards the royal gynaeceum.

Chapter: 5


Hanuma sees the denizens of city of Lanka rendered beautiful by the glorious moon,
Hanuma also become anxious had not become to able to find Seetha.

Chapter: 6


Hanuma moves about the city of Lanka, going from one house to another in search of
mother Seetha. He finds amazing wealth and riches abounding in that city of Ravana. He finally
enters the huge house of Ravana.

Chapter: 7


Hanuma continues his search for mother Seetha in Ravana's inner city. He sees the
aerial plane Pushpaka in Ravana's building.

Chapter: 8


This chapter describes Pushpaka in glorious and amazing detail.

Chapter: 9


This chapter further describes the inner buildings of Ravana's house. Hanuma passess
through a hall filled with Ravana's wives.

Chapter: 10
In this Chapter Hanuma has first glimpse of Ravana in his house. He also observes various wives 
of Ravana sleeping in the house. He sees Mandodari and thinks her to be Seetha.

Chapter: 11
Realizing that the woman he saw at Ravana's house was not Seetha, Hanuma begins to search again 
for Seetha.

Chapter: 12
In this chapter Hanuma gets discouraging thoughts about Seetha. He thinks that Seetha might be 
dead. He thus gets into depression for a moment.

Chapter: 13
In this chapter Hanuma starts to search for Seetha overcoming the depression. He begins to go towards 
Ashoka garden to continue his search.

Chapter: 14
Hanuma enters the Ashoka garden and observes its beauty. He starts looking for Seetha in the garden. 
He thinks that Seetha would definitely come to that garden if she were to be alive.

Chapter: 15
Hanuma continues his search in the Ashoka garden for Seetha. He sees an emaciated woman surrounded 
by demonesses. From Her radiance and manner of clothing etc, Hanuma recognizes Her to be Seetha.

Chapter: 16
Hanuma is grief stricken seeing the plight of Seetha, in that garden being surrounded by ogresses. 
He becomes firm in mind that She is indeed Seetha, based on Her auspicious bodily marks.

Chapter: 17
In this chapter Hanuma sees Seetha surrounded by ogresses.

Chapter: 18
In this chapter Hanuma sees Ravana entering Ashoka garden with a retinue of his wives following 
him.

Chapter: 19
In this chapter Valmiki describes the plight of Seetha in Ashoka garden in detail.

Chapter: 20
In this chapter Ravana entices Seetha with wealth, gems, sovereignty over all wives of Ravana.

Chapter: 21
In this chapter Seetha replies to Ravana saying that He should seek friendship with Rama and return 
Her back to Rama.

Chapter: 22
Ravana gives Seetha two months to marry hm. He orders ogres to frighten Seetha and bring Her to 
his control. Ravana then goes back to his own house with his consorts.

Chapter: 23
This chapter describes the ogre women speaking to Seetha about her marrying Ravana.

Chapter: 24
Seetha cites the examples of Sachi, Arundhati, Rohini et.al., on their devotion towards their husbands. 
Ogre women threaten to kill Seetha and eat her.

Chapter: 25
Seetha calls out Rama and others and bursts into a wail not being able to endure the threats of 
ogre women.

Chapter: 26
In this chapter Seetha ponders a lot and decides to give up life without Rama.

Chapter: 27
In this chapter an ogress named Trijata describes her dream. She dreams of Sri Rama triumphs and 
the ogre Ravana is conquered.

Chapter: 28
Seetha recollects the time limit of two months given by Ravana and her vulnerability of being killed 
by him. After lamenting for a while, she tries to strangle herself to death with the braid of her hair. At that 
moment, a propitious omen never seen before appears on her person.

Chapter: 29
Seetha experiences some good omens as follows; Her left eye, left shoulder and left thigh quivered, 
as also her clothing slipped a bit. Feeling these omens, her consciousness was awakened with exaltation.

Chapter: 30
Hanuma falls in a dilemma whether to console Seetha or to remain silent. Finally Hanuma decides 
to console Seetha, by eulogising Rama's attributes in a sweet voice, so that Seetha can give credence to his words.

Chapter: 31
Sitting on the branch of a Simshapa tree, Hanuma began to narrate in human language the story of 
Rama from the time he was born till his sending Hanuma to Lanka in search of Seetha. Hearing the narration of 
Hanuman, Seetha was overjoyed and finds Hanuma perched on Simshapa tree.

Chapter: 32
Seetha is shocked to see Hanuma, perched on the branches of a shimshupa tree She is confused whether 
it is a dream or a reality. Finally, she thinks that as the monkey is talking to her in a manifested form, it 
is quite a reality. She prays Lord Brihaspati and Brahma to make he words spoken by Hanuma as true.

Chapter: 33
Stepping down from the tree, Hanuma approached Seetha and asked her to clarify him whether she 
is the wife of Rama. Seetha then starts to narrate her antecedents and the story of Rama along with circumstances 
under which she along with Rama and Lakshmana went to Dandaka forest as per the command of King Dasaratha. She 
also informs Hanuma about her snatching away of Ravana from the forest.

Chapter: 34
Hearing the words of the grief-stricken Seetha, Hanuma reveals himself to be a messenger of Rama 
and repeats the enquiries made by Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva. Seetha, however, suspects Hanuma to be Ravana 
in disguise and chides him when Hanuma approaches nearer to her. Seetha then asks Hanuma to describe the good 
qualities of Rama. Hanuma on his part discloses to her his actuality as a minister of Sugreeva and tells the important 
qualities of Rama. He requests her to have faith in his words.

Chapter: 35
Seetha asks Hanuma to describe the various characteristics of Rama and Lakshmana. Hanuma describes 
n detail to Seetha the appearance and qualities of Rama and Lakshmana. Hanuma also gives an account of how a friendship 
developed between Rama and Lakshmana as well as Sugreeva the Lord of monkeys. Hanuma also narrates his own life-story 
from the time he was born till his role as a minister of Sugreeva. He ends the story with his sight of Seetha 
in Lanka.

Chapter: 36
Hanuma gives Seetha, the signet ring sent by Rama through him in order to strengthen 
her confidence in Seetha felt very happy to see the ring and praised Hanuma for his arrival to Lanka 
after having crossed the sea single handedly. She expresses her hope to Hanuma, saying that Rama, Lakshmana, 
Bharata and Sugreeva will come to Lanka with their armies so as to destroy Ravana, for her sake. Hearing 
Seetha's words, Hanuma consoles Seetha saying that Rama, Sugreeva and a host of monkeys will come to 
Lanka by crossing the ocean, so as to defeat Ravana and his army, with assurance that Rama will appear 
before her shortly.

Chapter: 37
Seetha was both delighted and depressed respectively on hearing Rama's episode from Hanuma 
and Rama's overwhelmed sorrow caused by his dissociation from her. She beseeches Hanuma to arrange for 
Rama's arrival to Lanka to meet her within two months, the period remaining out of the time-limit for 
her survival given by Ravana. Hanuma consoles Seetha, saying that Rama would surely come to see her. 
He also offers Seetha to carry her on his back to Rama's presence at Prasravana Mountain. Looking to 
the small size of Hanuma's body; Seetha doubts his capability to do it. Then, Hanuma assumes a gigantic 
form, so as to inspire confidence in Seetha. However, explaining various reasons, Seetha declines to 
go with him and requests Hanuma to bring her husband to Lanka.

Chapter: 38
Hanuma asks Seetha to give him a token of remembrance, which Rama can recognize. Seetha 
then narrates the episode of a crow which occurred on the Chitrakuta mountain and requests Hanuma to 
repeat it before Rama by way of a token of recollection. She further sends greetings to both Rama and 
Lakshmana, conveys her enquiry about their welfare and conveys to them her resolve to survive only for 
a month after the expiry of the time-limit given by Ravana. Thereupon, she hands over to Hanuma her 
jewel for the head as a token of remembrance.

Chapter: 39
Seetha asks Hanuma, who is prepared to depart with the jewel for her head, to convey 
her enquiries about the welfare of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva. She further requests Hanuma to urge 
them to rescue her. Then, Seetha expresses her doubt about the capacity of Rama, Lakshmana and the troops 
of monkeys and bears to cross the ocean. Hanuma explains to Seetha about the strength of monkey-heroes 
and assures her about their ability to cross the ocean. In the end, Hanuma consoles Seetha by promising 
to bring Rama and Lakshmana on his back across the sea so that they will together destroy the City of 
Lanka.

Chapter: 40
Seetha asks Hanuma to remind Rama of how he threw a blade of grass at the crow and destroyed 
its right eye thereby, as a token of remembrance. She also asks to remind Rama of his having once marked 
on her cheek with realgar, when a mark on her forehead was defaced, as a further token of Hanuma having 
met her. Seetha also requests Hanuma to appraise Rama of her wretched plight and finally greets him 
to have a happy journey ahead.

Chapter: 41
Hanuma thinks within himself that he should implement the fourth strategy for success, 
viz. open assault with the demons, so as to meet Ravana and his ministers for knowing their designs 
and strengths. Accordingly, he makes up his mind to damage the royal pleasure-garden attached to the 
gynaecium at Lanka and then proceeds to do that task.

Chapter: 42
Seeing the devastation caused to the pleasant grove by Hanuma the female-demons ask Seetha 
who that great monkey was and wherefore he has come and talked to her. Seetha replies that she knows 
nothing of him. Some of the female-demons go to Ravana and report to him that the pleasant grove attached 
to the gynaecuium has been destroyed by a mighty monkey and that the monkey went to Seetha and talked 
to her also earlier to the devastation. They also report that Seetha expressed her ignorance about him. 
Then, Ravana gets angry and sends some demons called Kinkaras to catch hold of Hanuma. Eighty thousand 
Kinkaras rush towards Hanuma to catch him. But Hanuma, with his might, kills all Kinkaras with an iron 
rod. Getting to know of the killings, Ravana again sends Jambumali, the son of Prahasta to catch hold 
of Hanuma.

Chapter: 43
After damaging the pleasure-grove and after killing the Kinkaras dispatched by Ravana, 
Hanuma thinks of destroying a sanctuary which is sacred to the guardian-deity of the demons. Hanuma 
ascends to the top of the sanctuary and after killing the guards posted there, shows his strength by 
clapping on his arms and by uttering the names of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva in a roaring voice. Hanuma 
assumes a gigantic form and uplifting a pillar in that sanctuary, he speedily whirls it around and burns 
the sanctuary by producing a fire, created out of its friction with the other pillars.

Chapter: 44
Ravana sends Jambumali, son of Prahasta, to capture Hanuma. Jambumali attacks Hanuma 
with his numerous arrows. Hanuma hurls a big rock towards Jambumali, but it fails to kill him. Then, 
Hanuma throws a big sal tree towards Jambumali and the latter succumbs to it.

Chapter: 45
The seven sons of Prahasta surrounded by a great army rush in speedy chariots upon Hanuma, 
who is standing on the archy gate way. They discharge a shower of arrows on Hanuma. Then, Hanuma crushes 
all the enemies, using his palms, feet, fists, nails, chest and thighs only as his weapons. After killing 
those demons, Hanuma climbs up the archy door-way and takes up his position there again.

Chapter: 46
Ravana sends Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdhara, Praghasa and Bhasakarna the five foremost 
army-generals so as to capture Hanuma. Ravana explains his guess, saying to those five generals that 
Hanuma may not be an ordinary monkey, but an evil spirit created by Indra the Lord of celestials and 
asks them to exert a great effort to capture him. Hanuma first kills Durdhara who initially attacks 
him. He then kills Virupaksha and Yupaksha, by attacking them with a sala tree. Hanuma later kills Praghasa 
and Bhasakarna, by hurling the top of a mountain on them. After destroying the remaining army together 
with horses elephants and chariots, he again in returns to the archy door way of the Ashoka groove.


Chapter: 47
Ravana sends Aksha, his own son, to fight against Hanuma. Aksha, along with his army 
elephants and horses, approach Hanuma and incites him to battle by discharging three sharp arrows. As 
Aksha discharges his arrows, Hanuma bounces quickly to the sky and smashes Aksha, his chariot and the 
horses with blows. After killing Aksha, Hanuma returns again to the same archy door-way.

Chapter: 48
Ravana calls Indrajit and asks him to go for a battle against Hanuma. Indrajit wielding 
a colourful bow quickly in a chariot to face Hanuma in combat. The arrows discharged by Indrajit are 
made ineffective by Hanuma, through his peculiar skill of maneuvering them like a wind-god. Realizing 
that Hanuma cannot be slain, Indrajit merely takes him captive by discharging the unfailing missile 
presided over by Brahma, the creator. Hanuma falls on the ground motionless. The demons tie him with 
ropes and drag him to the presence of Ravana. Hanuma yields to their operation of capture, even though 
capable of aborting it, eager as he was to meet Ravana.

Chapter: 49
Hanuma sees well-adorned Ravana, who is seated on a well-decorated throne of crystal. 
He is surrounded by four ministers viz., Durdhara, Prahasta, Mahaparshva and Nikumbha. Surprised to 
behold the splendor and glory of Ravana, Hanuma believes that he could even rule heaven along with Indra, 
but for his gross unrighteousness, which pulled him down.

Chapter: 50
As instructed by Ravana, Prahasta his chief minister inquires of Hanuma as to who he 
was and also his motive in destroying the pleasure-garden as also killing the demons. In reply, Hanuma 
says that he destroyed the pleasure-garden in order that he might be taken captive and dragged to the 
presence of Ravana, whom he was eager to see and was forced in self-defense to kill those who stood 
in his way. Finally, he declares himself to be a messenger of Rama and adds that, though he was incapable 
of being bound by a missile presided over by Brahma, he surrendered to it only in order to see Ravana 
in person.

Chapter: 51
Hanuma narrates the story of Rama, who on command from his father, went on exile to Dandaka 
forest along with Seetha, who was later borne away by Ravana through the sky over Rishyamuka mountain. 
Hanuma adds that Rama, while searching for Seetha at Mount Rishyamuka, happened to meet Sugreeva and 
made friendship with him. Hanuma also tells the story about Rama installing Sugreeva in the throne, 
after killing Vali and about Sugreeva promising Rama to get Seetha searched. Celebrating the glory of 
Rama, Hanuma points out to Ravana that if he wished to survive he should give back Seetha to Rama and 
that he should be prepared for the worst if on the other hand he refuses to do so.

Chapter: 52
Hearing the harsh words of Hanuma, Ravana orders him to be killed. Vibhishana, however, 
advises Ravana to desist from the dastardly act, pointing out that the killing of an envoy is forbiddenaccording 
to religious scriptures.

Chapter: 53
As ordered by Ravana, the demons wrap up old rags around Hanuma's tail, pour oil to it 
and burn it with fire. The demons tie Hanuma with ropes and conduct ihm to walk down the entire city, 
proclaining to the citizens of Lanka saying that Hanuma is a spy. The female-demons inform Seetha about 
the burning of Hanuma's tail and making him move around the city by demons. Then, Seetha starts praying 
the fire-god to do good to Hanuma. In response to her prayers, fire-god makes Hanuma feel cool with 
his burnign tail. Then, Hanuma approaches the city-gate of Lanka, takes an iron-rod from the arched 
door of the gate and kills all the security-guards there.

Chapter: 54
Hanuma, with his blazing tail comes out and flits over the horses in Lanka, making up 
his mind to set fire to the city of Lanka which is the only work let for him to do. Hanuma burns the 
entire city, barring the abode of Vibhishana. All the demons were frightened o seeing the blazing fire, 
consuming their city with its trees, houses and a host of living beings. Surprised to see the city burning, 
the celestials and musicians (Gandharvas) gain a great delight.

Chapter: 55
Making out that the whole of Lanka is reduced to ashes and conjecturing that Seetha too 
thus might have lost her life, Hanuma begins to reproach himself for his unrestrained exhibition of 
anger. Hanuma regrets that if Seetha dies now in this fire of Lanka, Rama and his brothers on hearing 
that report will not survive. While reflecting thus, Hanuma sees some good omens and asserts himself 
that Seetha can survive from the harsh forces of fire by her virtues of penance and devotion to Rama. 
In the meantime, he hears of her safety from the lips of Charanas (celestial bards) and feels consoled. 
Hanuma makes up his mind to return only after seeing her again.

Chapter: 56
Hanuma again visits Ashoka garden and sees Seetha once more. He consoles Seetha that 
Rama along with his forces of monkeys and bears will come soon and after conquering the enemies in battle, 
will take her back. After bidding adieu to Seetha, he ascends Mount Arishta and enlarges his body making 
himself ready to leap across the ocean.

Chapter: 57
Hanuma leaps from the coast of Lanka and touches Mount Mainaka, which he came across 
in the way. He advances further and roars at the top of his voice at the Mount Mahendra, so as to 
bring jubiliation to the monkeys awaiting his return there. Jambavan tells the monkeys, who moved 
by jumps with joy on hearing Jambavan, that Hanuma has returned successfully, from his expedition 
as way evident from his jubilant roar. Having greeted Jambavan, Angada and others on alighting on 
the summit of Mount Mahendra, Hanuma narrates to them briefly the story of his discovery of Seetha. 
Applauding Hanuma, prince Angada, who was eager to hear the story, sits down on a rock along with 
all others.,  

Chapter: 58
Jambavan, seated along with the monkey-troops, requested Hanuma to narrate clearly whatever 
has occurred. Hanuma narrates in detail how he saw Mount Mainaka in the course of his journey to Lanka 
and how he escaped on the way from the clutches of Surasa, a great serpent living in the ocean. Hanuma 
also narrated about his killing of Simhika, a female demon on the way and also about defeating another 
female demon (Lanka-incarnate) who was guarding the City of Lanka. Hanuma explains to Jambavan, how 
he beholds Seetha in Ashoka garden after a thorough search in the City of Lanka and how he introduces 
himself as an envoy sent by Rama and Sugreeva. Hanuma informs Jambavan that he hands over a finger-ring 
of Rama as a token of remembrance to Seetha and that he further asks for a return-token of remembrance 
from her, to be handed over to Rama. Hanuma then narrates about Seetha having delivered to him an excellent 
jewel for her head, as a token of remembrance. He further narrates about the demolition of the garden 
attached to Ravana's gynaecium and about killing of Aksha, Ravana's son. Hanuma further informs about 
his capture by Indrajit, Ravana's son and his tail being burnt by demons on receiving the orders of 
Ravana. He further informs about his setting fire of the City of Lanka. He finally narrates about his 
re-visit to Seetha and his return to Mount Mahendra.

Chapter: 59
Describing the plight of Seetha to his fellow monkeys, Hanuma expresses his feeling that 
it behoved them all to see Rama only after restoring Seetha from Lanka. Hanuma says that even single-handed, 
he is capable of destroying that City of Lanka with its troops of demons, and killing Ravana, much more 
so when accompanied by heroic, mighty and powerful monkeys. Then, he recounts the past heroic exploits 
of Jambavan, Angada, Neela, Panasa, Mainda and Dvivida. Hanuma thus incites them all to decide consciously 
of a war against Lanka.

Chapter: 60
Angada suggest with enthusiasm that Seetha must be restored by them only, after conquering 
Lanka. But Jambavan replies that it is not proper for them to do like that without enquiring about Rama's 
intention.

Chapter: 61
Leaving Mount Mahendra and leaping ahead towards Kishkindha, the monkeys on their way 
halt at Madhuvana, a protected grove abounded in honey which was dear to Sugreeva and guarded by the 
monkey, Dahimukha. When the monkeys started to enjoy drinking of honey in the grove with the permission 
of Prince Angada, Dahimukha hinders in their way. The monkeys bruise Dadhimukha with their nails and 
teeth.

Chapter: 62
The monkeys enter Madhuvana and partake the honey in plenty, as permitted by Hanuma and 
Angada. Singing and dancing as if in a drunken state, the monkeys were obstructed by those guarding 
the grove. The terrific monkeys warded off the guards, nay, they even dragged them by their knees and 
tossed them up in the air. The guards then went to Dadhimukha, the chief of the garden-guards and complained 
him of the matter. Dadhimukha along with his followers appears on the scene and invade the monkeys with 
trees and rocks. Angada thrashed Dadhimukha with his arms and made him fall on the ground. Dadhimukha 
along with his followers then proceed to Kishkindha to report the matter to him. Dadhimukha bows down 
and touches Sugreeva's feet as a mark of salutation.

Chapter: 63
Dadhimukha comes to Sugreeva and reports that Madhuvana, the grove abounding in honey, 
has been damaged by monkeys headed by Angada and Hanuma. When Lakshmana in the vicinity enquires Sugreeva 
about the matter, Sugreeva says that by hearing about the jubilation of the monkeys, it can be concluded 
that Seetha has been traced out. Assuaging Dadhimukha, Sugreeva asks him to send without delay, Hanuma, 
Angada and others to him, so as to hear about their efforts in tracing out Seetha.

Chapter: 64
Coming back to Madhuvana as instructed by Sugreeva, and craving forgiveness of Angada, 
Dadhimukha submits to him that he along with the other monkeys is urgently required by Sugreeva. Angada 
and other monkeys including Hanuma spring forward into the air towards Kishkindha. Even before the arrival 
of those monkeys, Sugreeva explains to Rama the valid reasons for concluding that Seetha has since been 
found. Angada, Hanuma and other, monkeys approach Sugreeva. Then, Hanuma apprises Rama of the discovery 
of Seetha. Hearing the news, Rama and Lakshmana were thrilled with joy and looked on Hanuma with a high 
esteem.

Chapter: 65
Angada, Hanuma and other monkeys approach Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva at Mount Prasravana. 
When monkeys start narrating the news of Seetha, Rama asks further details of Seetha. Then, the monkeys 
request Hanuma to explain the occurrences to Rama in detail. Then, Hanuma appraises Rama of Seetha's 
presence at the foot of a Simsupa tree in the midst of female-demons. After narrating the incidents 
related by her and delivering to Rama the jewel for the head, earlier handed-over by Seetha as a token, 
Hanuma conveys her message to Rama.

Chapter: 66
Rama, presses the jewel for the head, dispatched by Seetha on his bosom and speaks to 
Sugreeva, telling him that by seeing that excellent jewel he obtains the sight of Seetha, her father 
and father-in-law. Rama urges Hanuma, to repeat the words spoken by Seetha.

Chapter: 67
Hanuma narrates at length an incident connected with a crow that occured during the sojourn 
of Seetha with Rama at Chitrakuta, which was related by Seetha by way of a token of remembrance. Seetha 
then describes her miserable state to Hanuma and requests him to ask Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva to 
came to Lanka to destroy Ravana together with his army. Hanuma consoles Seetha, saying that Rama and 
Lakshmana would reduce Lanka to ashes and take her back to Ayodhya. When Hanuma further requests Seetha 
to give a token of remembrance to be handed over to Rama, she gives him a jewel for the head as a token.

Chapter: 68
Hanuma informs Rama how Seetha expressed her grave doubt as to how monkeys and bears 
can leap across a vast sea, as well as her appeal to Rama to destroy Ravana along with his entire army 
in Lanka and take her back to Ayodhya. Hanuma further informs Rama, how he resolved her doubt by explaining 
the prowess of the troops of monkeys and bears, commanded by Sugreeva as also how he brought solace 
and peace to her from her worries.

