Chapter: 1
Rama appreciates Hanuma and embraces him after hearing his report.Rama was gladdend
that Hanuma did something worthy of a noble servent. Then, Rama reflected upon the problem of how
to cross the ocean.

Chapter: 2
Sugreeva comforts Rama, who is tormented with grief, asking him to keep away from
apprehensive mind and to think of ways and means to cross the ocean.

Chapter: 3
On hearing the words of Sugreeva, Rama requests Hanuma to describe Lanka in detail.
Hanuma gives a detailed description of Lanka as he saw it.

Chapter: 4
After hearing the report of Hanuma, Rama fixes an auspicious hour for the departure of
his forces to Lanka and perceives good omens. The Army reaches the shores of the sea.

Chapter: 5
Rama recollects the lotus-eyed Seetha and laments much about his separation from her
Lakshmana consoles him and there approaches the sun-set.

Chapter: 6
Ravana recalls the over-powering of Lanka and discovering of Seetha by Hanuman. He
calls a meeting of his ministers and invites suggestions from them in view of the latest situation
of a probable attack of Rama and his army on the City of Lanka.

Chapter: 7
The demons inspire Ravana with confidence and eulogise his army's strength. They suggest
that Indrajit alone is enough to kill the army of monkeys together with Rama.

Chapter: 8
All the demons of King Ravana present there namely Prahasta, Durmukha,
Vajradamshtra, Nikumbha and Vajrahanu, eulogising their strengths, assure the king that they can
individually kill Rama and his army within no time.

Chapter: 9
Sumantra was unable to console Kausalya, who lied on the floor due to her extreme
grief over her separation from Rama, even though he tries to avert her grief by telling her that
Rama can reside in the forest delightfully, by warding off his agony.

Chapter: 10
Vibhishana, the half-brother of Ravana, lists out bad omens occurring in the city
and in the gynaeceum and advises Ravana to restore Seetha to Rama as an atonement t these evil
forces. Ravana turns a deaf ear to Vibhishana's counsel and sends him away.

Chapter: 11
Ravana goes again to the assembly hall, to hold consultations with his ministers,
othere important demons and Vibhishana.

Chapter: 12
Ravana instructs Prahasta, chief of his army to defend the city of Lanka carefully.
Prahasta positioned the army for defense accordingly at suitable places both inside and outside the
city. Ravana then narrates how he brought beautiful Seetha to Lanka from Dandaka forest, because of
his growing infatuation for her. Ravana asks his companions and relatives gathered there, to
suggest ways and means to kill Rama and Lakshmana. Then, Kumbhakarna, Ravana's brother first
accuses Ravana of his unworthy act but assures him that he would neutralize that dishonour by
killing the enemies.

Chapter: 13
Advised by Mahaparsva to take charge of Sita by force, Ravana expresses his
inability to do so, because of a curse pronounced against him by Brahma (lord of creation) in the
past. Ravana then boasts of his own prowess.

Chapter: 14
Vibhishana informs the assembly about the strength of the monkeys, and about the
power of Rama`s arrow. He also informs that none on the demon's side can withstand Rama, in battle.
Prahasta replies that they have no fear at any time to face Rama in battle. Then, Vibhishana
reiterates the enormous strength of the fatal arrows discharged by Rama and requests the assembly
to save Ravana by giving back Sita to Rama.

Chapter: 15
Indrajit criticizes Vibhishana for underestimating the former`s strength. Vibhishana
abuses Indrajit for his immaturity of mind and for his rash nature in underscoring the power of
Rama`s arrows. Vibhishana further advises Ravana to give back Sita along with valuable presents to
Rama and to live happily ever after in Lanka.

Chapter: 16
Ravana refuses to hear the words of Vibhishana and rebukes him with harsh words.
Vibhishana gets angry and sets off, to leave Ravana.

Chapter: 17
Vibhishana together with four of his companions reach Rama's place. Halting in the
sky itself, Vibhishana asks Rama to give a refuge to him. Sugriva tells Rama that he cannot trust
Vibhishana the demon. Then Rama asks for opinion of the leaders in his group. Angada, sharabha,
Jambavan and Mainda expressed their apprehensions to accept Vibhishana. But Hanuman says that
Vibhishana need not be doubted because he thinks that Vibhishana understands the merits in Rama and
demerits in Ravana. Hanuman further adds that Vibhishana is approaching Rama for refuge because
Vibhishana is desirous of obtaining the kingdom of demons. Hanuman requests Rama to take his final
decision on the matter.

Chapter: 18
Hearing Hanuman's words, Rama says that he cannot desert Vibhishana who is seeking a
refuge in him. Initially Sugreeva disagrees with Rama's opinion. But when Rama explains the
different circumstances under which Vibhishana is acceptable, Sugreeva also agrees with that view.
Finally Vibhishana joins as an associate in Rama's side.

Chapter: 19
Descending from the sky, Vibhishana seeks refuge at the feet of Rama. On Rama's
enquiry, he explains about the strength of Ravana. Rama promises to kill Ravana and anoints
Vibhishana. Rama sits on the sea -shore, seeking the help of the ocean god to yield a passage for
his army to pass through and reach the city of Lanka.

Chapter: 20
As per the advice of Sardula, Ravana sends Shuka to Sugriva as an ambassador. The
monkeys harass him, who came to their place as a spy. But because of Rama's gracefulness, Shuka
comes out of danger. Sugriva gives a fitting reply to Ravana's message sent through Shuka. When
monkeys again try to bind him and harass him, Rama prevents them from killing him.

Chapter: 21
The careless ocean did not appear in his personal form to Rama, even when it was
requested to do so. Rama becomes angry at the ocean and looses fierce arrows, which cause a terror
among the creatures inhabiting the sea.

Chapter: 22
When Rama is about to release a missile presided over by Brahma from his bow, the
sea-god appears in person before him with joined palms and advises him to get a bridge constructed
by Nala across the ocean. The ocean god disappears after giving this advice to Rama. Nala
accordingly constructs a bridge across the sea with the help of other monkeys.

Chapter: 23
Rama explains to Lakshmana the various portents, he observes around him, that signal
a destructive war fare. He orders for formation of battalions in the army and surges forth together
with the battalions towards Lanka.

Chapter: 24
Seeing Lanka and describing it, Rama instructs Lakshmana to draw up his army in
battle array. Rama orders for release of Shuka who was captured by the army earlier. Shuka
approaches Ravana and describes the strength of Rama's side of the army. Ravana boasts himself of
his own army's strength.

Chapter: 25
While Rama crossed over to the other shore of the sea, Ravana instructs his
ministers, Suka and Sarana to enter the enemy's army in disguise and to bring all the required
information about them. When Suka and Sarana entered the enemy's ranks, Vibhishana recognises and
captures them. But Rama sets them free. Going back to Ravana, they explain the might strength of
the enemy's ranks and exhort him to restore Seetha to Rama.

Chapter: 26
Hearing the submission of Sarana, Ravana climbs up the roof of his palace and sees
the entire army of monkeys from there. Ravana enquires about the various monkey leaders and Sarana
shows him Nila, Angada, Nala, Sweta, Kumuda, Rambha, Sarabha, Panasa, Vinata and Krathana the
army-generals along with their distinguishing characterestics.

Chapter: 27
Sharana continues to describe the individual strengths of the various commanders in
the army of monkeys, mentioning their names one by one, in detail.

Chapter: 28
Shuka in his turn enumerates the enemies and completes the account given by
Sarana.

Chapter: 29
Ravana reprimands Shuka and Sarana, asking them to leave the assembly. He again
sends some spies to the place of Rama and Lakshmana. Those spies were got caught by Vibhishana and
the monkeys start harassing them. But the compassionate Rama gets them released and the spies reach
back Lanka.

Chapter: 30
Dispatched by the king Ravana to ascertain the strength of the army in the
opposition-camp, Shardula the demon-spy acquaints his master with the important leaders of the
monkeys.

Chapter: 31
Agitated to learn that Rama had arrived to Lanka and is stationed at Suvela mountain along with his army,
Ravana confers with his ministers and after dismissing them, approaches Seetha with Vidyujjuha, knower of
conjuring tricks. Informing Seetha that her husband along with his army had been killed in battle, he produces
before her an illusive Rama's head along with bow and arrows created with Vidyujjuha's conjuring trick.
Thus, Ravana deceives Seetha about the death of Rama.

Chapter: 32
Seetha was shocked, fell unconscious at the sight of Rama's head and bow. She regained
consciousness and asked Ravana to kill her also, so that she would join her husband in heaven. Meanwhile,
Ravana is abruptly called away by an emissary and after consultation with his ministers, prepares his
army for action against the forces of Rama.

Chapter: 33
An ogre named Sarama reassures Seetha by telling her that Ravana, the conjurer
created an illusory appearance of Rama's head and exhibited it before her. She informs Seetha that
Rama is still alive and is stationed along with his forces at the southern shore of the ocean.
Sarama restores confidence to Seetha, by saying that Rama after killing Ravana in battle will soon
win her back.

Chapter: 34
Seetha asks Sarama to go secretly to Ravana and get to know what he is doing as well
as report to her back about Ravana's decision about the matter of releasing her or continuing to
keep her captive. Sarama secretly hears the conversation of Ravana with his ministers and reports
to Seetha that Ravana is not inclined to set her free. Sarama consoles Seetha, saying that Rama
with his sharp arrows will kill Ravana and take her back to Ayodhya.

Chapter: 35
With the sound of kettle drums and couches, Rama arrives to Lanka with his army.
Ravana hears those sounds and calls his ministers to chalk out his further course of action.
Malyavan, Ravana's maternal grandfather advises Ravana to conclude peace with Rama and restore
Seetha to him as he is perceiving adverse omens.

Chapter: 36
Ravana turns his deaf ear to the words of Malyavan and even abuses him that the latter
exaggerating the strength of Rama. Ravana further says that he will not restore Seetha to Rama and that
Rama and his army will not go back alive, having crossed the ocean and reached Lanka. Then, Ravana assigns
Prahasta and others to guard the four main gates of Lanka against the inroads of the enemy. He retires
to his inner apartments, after ordering these assignments.

Chapter: 37
Rama, Sugreeva, Hanuman and others assemble to take counsel together, upon reaching
the precinets of Lanks. While they were delibrating on the ways and means for the success of their
mission, Vibhishana informs that he has sent his counsellors as spies to gather information about
the enemy's plans and that they returned after gathering the required news about Ravana's
arrangements at the four gates of theity. After hearing Vibhishana's information, Rama orders Nila,
Angada Hanuman and others to storm the four gates and decides to stay on Suvela mountain with his
army.

Chapter: 38
Rama expresses his desire to Vibhishana and Sugreeva to halt on Suvela mountain for that
night, and to envision the City of Lanka. Rama along with Lakshmana, Vibhishana, Sugreeva and his army
ascend the mountain and witness the beauty of Lanka. They halt on that mountain-resort for the night.

Chapter: 39
Rama and the monkeys see the charming gardens and groves located in Lanka, viewing
them from the top of Suvela mountain. Some of the monkeys, thrilling with rapture, enter the
gardens and enjoy their beauty of flowers and birds. Some others went towards Lanka; located on the
apex of Trikuta mountain. They see the city with its large mansions and seven storied buildings,
including the thousand-pillared mansion of Ravana with a height almost touching the skies.

Chapter: 40
Rama together with Sugreeva and others mount to the top of Suvela mountain and see
the city of Lanka. There, above a gate-way of the City, stands Ravana. Seeing Ravana, Sugreeva
springs to the top of the gate where Ravana is bounces on him, pulls his thrown and throws it away
on the ground. thereafter, Ravana and Sugreeva carry on duel for a long time without any fatigue.
They wrestle endlessly in different postures. Finally, after reducing Ravana to exhaustion,
Sugreeva comes back and rejoins his monkey-troops.

Chapter: 41
Rama advises Sugreeva not to repeat such reckless acts in future on the ground of he
being a king. Then Rama tells Lakshmana about the various evil portents he had seen. Rama commands the
monkey-generals to besiege all the four gates of Lanka. He himself along with Lakshmana protects the
army, besieging the northern gate being guarded by Ravana. Then, Rama sends Angada to Ravana, to expostulate
him and to bring him back to reason. Angada tries his best to convince Ravana, but in vain. Ravana commands
his attendants to seize Angada. Angada shakes out those attendants who tried to seize him ascends the
roof of Ravana's palace, tramples ad crushes it down by his strength. Angada finally returns to Rama,
who was stationed in the midst of the monkey-forces.

Chapter: 42
The demons break the news to Ravana about Lanka. Ravana having been laid siege to by
the monkeys. Ravana then ascends his mansion and surveys the innumerable troops of monkeys,
occupying the entire city of Lanka. Meanwhile, Rama issues a command to the monkeys to destroy the
enemies forthwith. The monkeys start demolishing various important defensive structures of the city
of Lanka and besiege all the city-gates. Ravana also commands his army to commence combat. Sounds
of couches blown by the army and terrible roars on both sides re-echoes the air, earth and sea.
Demons begin to strike the monkeys with their weapons and the monkeys respond the strike with
trees, mountain-tops, nails and teeth.

Chapter: 43
Extra-ordinary duels arose between the monkeys and demons, who ran up towards each
other. Indrajit fought with Angeda, Sampati with Prajangha, Hanuman with Jambumali, Vibhishana with
the demon Shatrughna, Gaja with Tapana, Nila with Nikumbha, Sugreeva with Praghasa, Lakshmana with
Virupaksha, Agniketu and others with Rama, Vajramsushit with Mainda, Ashaniprabha with Divivda,
Pratapana with Nala and Sushena with Vidyunami. Streams of blood flowed from both sides. In a
series of hand-to-hand encounters, the valiant monkeys destroyed the strong demons. The remaining
demons waited for the sun to se-in and re-assembled with a renewed vigour for the battle.

Chapter: 44
A nocturnal was commences between the hostile demons and monkeys. The demons destroy
some monkeys. The monkeys drag and kill elephants, chariots and their occupants. Rama and Lakshmana
even in that darkness kill the foremost of demons. As a result of the struggle, streams of blood
flow in the battle-field. That fatal night transforms into a night of dissolution. When some demons
attack Rama with arrows, Rama strikes down six of the demons within a moment and they run away for
life. Rama then clears off innumerable demons from the battle filed. Angada strikes Indrajit, his
chariot and the charioteer all at once, but Indrajit vanishes from the spot. Sugreeva and his
monkeys feel delighted and praise Angada's prowess. Indrajit comes back in an invisible form and by
recourse to magic, makes Rama and Lakshmana captive by hurling a net work of serpentine around
them.

Chapter: 45
Rama orders ten of the monkey-generals to search for the whereabouts of Indrajit. But
Indrajit arrested the approach of those monkeys, by means of his arrows. Both Rama and Lakshmana were
transfixed by Indrajit with a net work of serpentine arrows into the vital parts of Rama and Lakshmana
and they fall down on the battle-ground in a bath of blood. Seeing those two scions of Raghu in that
state, the monkeys give way to utter despondence.

Chapter: 46
The monkeys along with Hanuman and Angada begin to grieve, on beholding the plight
of Rama and Lakshmana who were entwined in a net work of arrows. Indrajit informs demons about his
adventure of captivating both Rama and Lakshmana by his net work of serpentine arrows. Indrajit
strikes the other monkey-cheifs like . Nila, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanuman, Gavaksha and Angada as also
Jambavan. When Sugreeva looks depressed on seeing the plight of Rama and Lakshmana, Vibhishana
consoles him, saying that Rama is not going to die. He also reassures the disheartened monkeys and
infuses confidence in them. Indrajit, in the meanwhile, informs Ravana that both Rama and Lakshmana
have been killed. Ravana applauds his son for his daring act.

Chapter: 47
Ravana summons some female demons including Trijata and instructs them to take
Seetha in Pushpaka-plane to the battle-front and show Rama and Lakshmana alleged to have been
killed by Indrajit. Accordingly, the female-demons take Seetha in Pushpaka-plane and show her Rama
and Lakshmana lying unconscious on a bed of arrows in the battle-field. Imagining Rama and
Lakshmana to have been dead, Seetha bursts into sobs.

Chapter: 48
Seetha, on beholding Rama and Lakshmana, was absorbed in various thoughts like, "The
sooth sayers had prophesied that I should never be widowed and would bear sons. How could their
prediction become untrue?" However, Trijata reassures her, stating good reasons for Rama and
Lakshman to be still alive and cheering her up, takes her back to Ashoka grove.

Chapter: 49
Returning to consciousness, Rama laments over the plight of Lakshmana, who was lying
unconscious. The foremost of monkeys too were plunged in grief and despondency on seeing Rama
lamenting as aforesaid. In the meantime, Vibhishana approaches Rama and the monkeys flee away,
mistaking him as Indrajit.

Chapter: 50
Observing Vibhishana to be the cause of panic created among the monkeys, Sugreeva
asks Jambavan to restore the confidence of monkeys. Jambavan then ressures the monkeys. Vibhishana
also feels distressed on perceiving the bodies of Rama and Lakshmana lying unconscious on the
ground. Sugreeva consoles and convinces Ravana that Rama and Lakshmana will regain consiousness.
Meanwhile, Garuda the King of Birds, makes his appearance on the scene and liberates Rama and
Lakshmana from their bondage.

Chapter: 51
Hearing the rejoicing cries of the monkeys, Ravana asks some demons to discover the
cause of that rejoicing. The demons mount the rampart and discover that Rama and Lakshmana have
been relieved of the shackle of arrows. They come to Ravana and inform that the two brothers Rama
and Lakshmana are alive and appear like two strong elephants in the battle-field. Ravana then calls
Dhumraksha, a demon and asks him to go with an army and kill Rama, Lakshmana and the monkeys
Dhumraksha along with his army enters the western gate of Lanks where the army-chief Hanuman is
stationed. While Dhumraksha advances in the battle-field, he observes several bad omens and feels
disturbed.

Chapter: 52
Dhumraksha along with army attacks the monkeys. A tumultuous battle ensued between
the demons and the monkeys. The battle reached frightful proportions in that both the monkeys and
demons were killed in large numbers. When Dhumraksha pounced on Hanuman, the latter shattered
Dhumraksha's chariot to pieces. Lifting his mace, Dhumraksha fights with Hanuman, who in turn hits
him on his head and kills him.

Chapter: 53
Ravana sends Vajradamstra, another demon to kill Rama, Sugreeva and his monkeys.
Vajradamstra and his army emerge from the southern gate where Angada, the General of the Monkeys is
stationed. The monkeys had a tough fight with the demons. Angada, the leader of the monkeys strikes
the terrible strong demons, chopping off their heads.

Chapter: 54
The powerful demon Vajradamshtra penetrated the army of monkeys, sowing terror among
them. The monkeys then sought refuge with Angada the monkey-leader. A fierce battle ensues between
Vajradamshtra and Angada. Angada assaults Vajradamshtra with a sword and Vajradamshtra's head falls
on the ground.

Chapter: 55
Ravana next sends Akampana for the battle. As Akampana along with his army sets out
for the war, he visualized various bad portents. A deadly conflict ensued between monkeys and
demons. Kumuda, Nala and Mainda the chiefs of monkeys creates a great carnage among demons.

Chapter: 56
Akampana enters the battle-field and assails the monkeys with his bow and arrows.
Then, Hanuman comes to the rescue of the monkeys. A great fight ensued between Akampana and
Hanuman. Hanuman strikes the head of Akampana with a huge tree and Akampana dies. All the demons
take to their heels and return to Lanka.

Chapter: 57
Ravana asks Prahasta to go to the battle. Prahasta sets out for the combat along
with a huge army and enters the eastern gate. Bad omens appeared, as Prahasta enters the
battle-field. The army of monkeys seized hold of trees and rocks, to attack the demons.

Chapter: 58
On Rama's enquiry, Vibhishana explains the prowess of Prahasta who entered the
battle-field. The demons with their arrows and the monkeys with their stones combat each other.
Both the monkeys and demons were killed in the battle. Prahasta the demon and Nila the monkey come
face to face to fight. Prahasta hurls a volley of darts over Nila. Nila kills Prahasta's horses by
hurling a huge tree and breaks his bow. Finally a huge rock hurled by Nila breaks Prahasta's head
into myriad pieces and dies. All the other demons abandon the battle-field and return to Lanka.

Chapter: 59
Feeling desperate at the death of Prahasta, Ravana himself appears on the
battle-front for an encounter, along with Akampana, Indrajit, Atikaya, Mahodara, Pishacha,
Trishiras, Kumbha, Nimkumbha and Narantaka the foremost of demons. After a tough fight with
Sugreeva, Lakshmana, Hanuma and Nila, Ravana encounters Rama in battle, and sustaining an
ignominious defeat at the latter's hands and escaping with his life, withdraws to Lanka.

Chapter: 60
Ravana returns to Lanka and asks some demons to go to the abode of sleeping
Kumbhakarna, to wake him up and request him to come to him. The slumbering Kumbhakarna is roused by
the demons under orders of their king. Kumbhakarna, giant in form, sets out on the high way to see
Ravana and the monkeys get alarmed to see the giant demon.

Chapter: 61
Rama sees Kumbhakarna with a colossal body and enquires Vibhishana about a report of
him. Then Vibhishana apprises Rama about Kumbhakarna and narrates his story of his getting curse
from Brahma, imprecating him to sleep apparently Vibhishana adds that on an appeal from Ravana
Brahma relaxed the curse saying that Kumbhakarna would keep sleeping for every six months and then
waking up for a day in a year Vibhishana informs Rama that Ravana got Kumbhakarna awakened and is
sending now to the battle. Rama then orders Neela the commander-in-cheif to marshal his entire army
of monkeys in their appropriate positions in Lanka. On hearing Rama's orders the army of monkeys
start their fighting operation.

Chapter: 62
Kumbhakarna enters the abode of Ravana and sees his worried brother sitting in
Pushpaka, a self-moving aerial car. Kumbhakarna asks Ravana about the nature of work to be done by
him and whether he has to kill anyone. Ravana replies that Rama has come with troops of monkeys
including Sugreeva, after crossing the ocean by a bridge, to wage a battle Ravana requests
Kumbhakarna to show his terrible prowess in killing all the adversaries in battle.

Chapter: 63
Kumbhakarna abuses Ravana for his utter disregard of the earlier advices given by his
well-wishers like Vibhishana, due to his sheer arrogance and neglect of the scriptures which enumerate
the king's duties. Ravana replies to Kumbhakarna that bygone is a bygone and asks him to proceed to
the battle-front. Then, Kumbhakarna reassures Ravana and promises him that all the adversaries would
be destroyed by him in the ensuing battle.

Chapter: 64
Mahodara excitedly speaks to Kumbhakarna about the true character of virtue, worldly
gain as well as sensuous pleasure in a person and supports Ravana for his actions. He advises
Kumbhakarna not to go single-handed to fight with mighty Rama, but to take the army with him.
Mahodara then suggests to Ravana a strategy to fulfill his purpose without a combat.

Chapter: 65
Kumbhakarna rebukes Mahodara for rendering a wrong advice to Ravana. He asserts
Ravana, saying that he will annihilate Rama in battle. Ravana gets pleased and orders Kumbhakarna
to wipe off the monkeys together with Rama and Lakshmana in battle. Then, Ravana arranged for
ornamentation of the various limbs of Kumbhakarna with various types of jewellery, before sending
him to the battle. As Kumbhakarna sallies forth to the battle, several bad omens appear on all
sides. Kumbhakarna disregards these portents and marches ahead for the battle. Seeing the colossal
form of Kumbhakarna, all the monkeys get frightened and take to their heels.

Chapter: 66
Seeing Kumbhakarna coming with his colossal body and emitting a tremendous roar, the
monkeys scare away. Angada reassures the monkeys, who then return to the battle field to resume
fight. When the monkeys start attacking Kumbhakarna, the latter crushes some monkeys with rage.
Then again, the monkeys get frightened and run away in different directions. Angada then restores
the monkeys to confidence once more and all the monkeys stand awaiting the command of Angada.

Chapter: 67
Restored to confidence by Angada, all the monkeys return to the battle-field.
Dvivida, a leader of the monkeys hurls a mountain towards Kumbhakarna, but it misses the target and
falls on horses, elephants and chariots of the enemy. Dvivida hurls another mountain and some
demons are killed. Hanuma strikes Kumbhakarna with a large mountain-peak and injures him severely.
In reply, Kumbhakarna strikes on Hanuma's chest with his spike. Then, Kumbhakarna strikes other
monkey-chiefs who attack him. Thousands of monkeys then ascend Kumbhakarna's body and encounters
him with their nails, fists, teeth and arms. In response, Kumbhakarna destroys all those monkeys
with his spike. When Angada, the leader of the monkeys, attacks Kumbhakarna, the latter strikes
Angada violently and Angada falls unconscious. Then, Kumbhakarna begins his attack on Sugreeva.
But, Sugreeva strikes Kumbhakarna's chest with a mountain, but the mountain only breaks into
pieces. When Kumbhakarna throws his spike towards Sugreeva in retaliation, Hanuma stops it on the
way and breaks it off. Then, Kumbhakarna hurls a mountian-crust on Sugreeva to make him unconscious
and takes him away on his shoulders to Lanka. When Sugreeva regains consciousness, he tears off the
ears and nose of Kumbhakarna with his sharp nails and teeth. In relation, Kumbhakarna thren
Sugreeva down and crushed him. Then Sugreeva bounces into the air and gets re united with Rama.
Kumbhakarna thereafter takes his hammer and begins to attack the monkeys and bears. Then, Lakshmana
starts to attack Kumbhakarna with his arrows. But, Kumbhakarna appreciates the valour of Lakshmana
and proceeds towards Rama to fight with him. Rama discharges some arrows with 'Roundra' spell
towards Kumbhakarna. Those arrows disappear into Kumbhakarna's chest and make him weapon-less. In
retaliation, Kumbhakarna hurls a mountain-peak towards Rama and even before the mountain-peak
reaches Rama, it was split up into pieces by the arrows released by Rama. Thereupon, on the advice
given by Lakshmana, all the monkeys climb straight upon Kumbhakarna's body. Kumbhakarna shakes them
off with violence. Then, Rama employs a great missile and chops off one arm of Kumbhakarna. When
Kumbhakarna with an uprooted tree in his arm, retailiates by running towards Rama, the latter with
an arrow, presided over by Indra, hurls it on the former and chops off the second arm of
Kumbhakarna, Rama then chops off the feet of Kumbhakarna with his arrows and finally slashes off
his head.

Chapter: 68
Hearing the news of Kumbhakarna having been killed by Rama, Ravana laments in
various ways, thinking that he has virtually lost his right arm. Ravana initially faints on hearing
the shocking news. On regaining consciousness, Ravana again wonders how the invincible Kumbhakarna
was slain in battle. He feels sorry for not having listened to the sagacious advice of Vibhishana
in the past.

Chapter: 69
As Ravana is lamenting over the death of Kumbhakarna, Trishira (one of Ravana's
sons) consoles him and says that he will go to the battle-field and kill Rama. Hearing the words of
Trishira, Ravana's other sons (Devantaka, Narantaka and Atikaya) also come forward to join the
fight. Then Ravana sends all them to the battle. He also sends Mahodara and Mahaparshva, his
brothers to guard his sons. Mighty demons accompany them. The demons release arrows towards the
monkeys, who see the demons coming in elephants, horses and chariots. The monkeys take huge rocks
and trees to fight with the demons. Seeing several demons being killed in battle, Narantaka enters
the field with his javelin and kills several monkeys. Meanwhile, those monkeys who were thrown down
unconscious by Kumbhakarna earlier regain their consciousness and approach Sugreeva for help. Then,
Sugreeva sends Angada for the fight. Narantaka hurls his javelin towards Angada's chest, but the
javelin breaks and falls down. Angada strikes Narantaka's horse with his hand and the horse falls
down dead. Then, Angada and Narantaka exchange the blows of their fists on each other in battle and
finally, Narantaka dies.

Chapter: 70
Mahodara, Trishira and Devantaka start attacking Angada. When Angada attacks them
with trees, they chop off the trees and break away the rocks hurled at them. With a blow of
Angada's palm, Devantakas's elephant falls down dead. Seeing Angada being surrounded by three
valiant demons, Hanuma and Neela arrive there. With a blow of Hanuma's fist, Devantaka dies.
Trishira and Mahodara attack Neela with their arrows. Mahodara dies in the hands of Neela.
Meanwhile, Hanuma and Trisira fight at each other. Hanuma finally kills Trishira, by chopping off
his three heads by Trishira's sword itself. Then, Mahaparshva, the demon comes to the battle field
and attacks Rishabha, the monkey-warrior. By banging Mahaparshva's mace on Mahaparshva Rishabha
kills him.

Chapter: 71
Seeing Atikaya, the colossal demon, coming towards him on a chariot, Rama asks
Vibhishana who he is Vibhishana introduces Atikaya, as being a son of Ravana and Dhanyamali
(another consort of Ravana). When some commanders of monkeys try to attack Atikaya, he chops off
trees and crags hurled at him. Without fighting further with the monkeys, Atikaya, moves forward to
Rama and challenges him for a fight. Then Lakshmana with his bow and arrows begins to fight with
Atikaya. By a sharp arrow struck by Atikaya in Lakshmana's chest, Lakshmana is enraged and releases
an arrow employed with a missile of fire and Atikaya attacks it with an arrow employed with a solar
missile. On the advice the wind-god appeared before him, Lakshmana finally hurls an arrow employed
with a missile of Brahma and chips off the head of Atikaya.

Chapter: 72
Having been informed that Atikaya, Dhumraksha, Akampana, Prahasta, Kumbhakarna and
other mighty demons are killed in battle, Ravana felt anxious. He is surprised as to how Rama and
Lakshmana got released from the bind of arrows, made by Indrajit, his son earlier. He feels that no
demon is capable of defeating Rama, Lakshmana, Sugreeva and Vibhishana. He enjoins demons to
protect the City of Lanka and even Ashoka garden, where Seetha has been kept in capture. He asks
the army not to be indifferent to the movements of the monkey-warriors. After issuing the necessary
instruction to his army, he enters deep into his palace and remains boarding over the loss of
Atikaya, his son.

Chapter: 73
Seeing Ravana, his father looking lamented after hearing the death of Ravana's sons
and brothers, Indrajit promises to destroy Rama and Lakshmana. He sets out, for the battle,
accompanied by his army. After reaching the battle-field, Indrajit performed a sacrificial ritual
there, duly making an oblation to the fire. After performing the sacrificial rite, Indrajit goes
himself invisible into the sky. Indrajit then showers multitude of arrows towards the monkeys and
the monkeys lose their consciousness. Indrajit tears asunder principal monkey-warriors by his maces
and arrows. Then, he rains a multitude of arrows of Rama and Lakshmana. Rama says to Lakshmana that
he along with Lakshmana can act as thought they fell unconscious, so that Indrajit can return to
Lanka, boasting of his laurels of victory. Grievously hurt on the battle field by the missiles of
Indrajit, Rama and Lakshmana along with the whole army of monkeys fell unconscious.

Chapter: 74
After having been struck by Brahma's missile released by Indrajit, Rama and
Lakshmana became unconscious. Sixty-seven crores of monkeys fainted. Hanuma and Vibhishana, however
in consciousness, roared about in the battle-front with torches in their hands, making a search of
Jambavan. They find Jambavan. Jambavan requests Hanuma to proceed to Himalayas, by crossing over
the ocean and to bring four important herbs, viz. Mrita Sanjivani, Vishalya karani, Suvarna karani
and Sandhani; so as to bring succour to the fainted army of monkeys. Hanuma begins his journey to
Himalayas and reaches Mount Rishabha, where the wonderful herbs exist. Hanuma searches for the four
wonderful herbs. But the herbs appear invisible for him. Hanuma uproots the mountain clothed with
the four celestial herbs and carries it along with him. Inhaling the odour of those herbs, Rama,
Lakshmana and all the monkeys regain their normal health.

Chapter: 75
King Sugreeva asks Hanuma to arrange for setting ablaze the City of Lanka. With
torches in their hands, some monkeys throw fire to all parts of Lanka. The City, burnt by the
monkeys within a short time, assumed like the earth burning at the time of a terrific dissolution
of the world. Getting healed of their wounds, Rama and Lakshmana take their bows to resume
fighting. Gates and buildings in the city are tumbled down by Rama's arrows. Ravana gets enraged
and sends Kumbha and Nikumbha the sons of Kumbhakarna along with other demons to the battle. A
terrific fighting ensure between the monkeys and the demons. All the monkeys finally surround the
army of demons in all sides.

Chapter: 76
Angada kills Kampana and severely injures Shonitaksha, the demons in battle. Angada,
along with Mainda and Dvivida the monkey-warriors encounter Shonitaksha, Yupaksha and Prajangha.
Angada kills Prajangha. Shonitaksha dies in the hands of Dvivida and Youpaksha at the hands of
Mainda. When Kumbha throws down Angada in the battle-field, Rama sends some more monkey-chiefs
headed by Jambavan. Sugreeva, with his thunderbolt-like fist, strikes Kumbha with a heavy blow and
kills him.

Chapter: 77
Seeing Kumbha his brother killed in battle, the enraged Nikumbha with an iron club as
his weapon roars and faces the battle. Hanuma directly attacks Nikumbha, by striking his fist forcibly
on Nikumbha's breast. Unmoved by that blow, Nikumbha lifts Hanuma, off the ground. Hanuma in retaliation
frees himself and throws down Nikumbha on the ground. Hanuma descends on Nikumbha, pounds his chest
with his fist, catches his head and tears it off. Thus, Nikumbha dies at the hands of Hanuma.

Chapter: 78
Ravana orders Makaraksha to proceed to the battle-field with an army and to kill
Rama, Lakshmana and the monkeys. Makaraksha, surrounded by his army of demons, set out for the
encounter. Makaraksha's whip and flag staff fall down all of a sudden, by the will of providence
and a dust-storm ensued. Ignoring those portents, Makaraskha's army march forward in the
battle-field, to reach Rama and Lakshmana.

Chapter: 79
Fight again ensues between monkeys and demons, when Makaraksha enters the
battle-field. The monkeys get frightened of Makaraksha's arrows and begin to run away. Rama comes
in and intercepts the demons with his hail of arrows. Makaraksha challenges Rama to fight with him.
Rama tears off the arrows hurled by Makaraksha and Makaraksha broke the arrows released by Rama.
Finally, Rama breaks the chariot and its horses of his chariot, stands on the ground, takes a
splendorous spike in his hand to fight and hurls it on Rama. Rama chops it off with his four
arrows. When Makaraksha rushes towards Rama to fight with his fist, Rama hurls a mystic missile
from his bow and kills him on the spot. The demons get frightened and run away to Lanaka.

Chapter: 80
Ravana instructs Indrajit to proceed to the battle field. Before proceeding t the
battle, Indrajit performs ceremorial oblations into a sacred fire and obtains a capacity of going
out of sight while fighting. He proceeds to the battle-field and releases a flood of arrows towards
Rama and Lakshmana, while himself remaining invisible in the sky. With a network of arrows,
Indrajit creates a darkness in the sky and showers a multitude of steel arrows towards Rama and
Lakshmana. Sharp golden shafts arrows are then released by Rama and Lakshmana. Struck by the arrows
discharged by Indrajit, monkeys in hundreds fall down dead. Then, Rama and Lakshmana reflect on the
various ways and means to destroy Indrajit.

Chapter: 81
Placing an illusory live image of Seetha in his chariot, Indrajit along with his
army enters the battle-field. Hanuma with his army of monkeys march in front to face Indrajit in
battle. While Hanuma and his army are watching, Indrajit pulls Seetha by her hair and unsheathed
his sword. Indrajit kills the illusory living image of Seetha, with his sharp sword.

Chapter: 82
Led by Hanuma, the monkeys fight with the demons in battle with trees and rocks. On
seeing his army seriously hurt, Indrajit releases a number of arrows and kills some monkeys. Hanuma
destroys some terrible demons with trees and rocks. Later, Hanuma along with his army returns to
the presence of Rama. Indrajit pours oblations into the sacred fire at the santuary of
Nikumbhila.

Chapter: 83
Hanuma, with his army, approaches Rama and informs him that Indrajit has killed
Seetha. Rama faints away, upon hearing that news. The monkeys sprinkle water on Rama, so that he
regains consciousness. Then, Lakshmana embraces Rama and discusses with him the roles of vice and
virtue in life. After consoling Rama, Lakshmana prepares for a fight with Indrajit.

Chapter: 84
Vibhishana comes to Lakshmana and beholds Rama having fallen into a swoon and lying
in the lap of Lakshmana. Lakshmana informs Vibhishana that on hearing the words of Hanuma saying
that Seetha was killed by Indrajit, Rama fell into a swoon. Telling Rama the secret of conjuring
trick practiced by Indrajit in killing an illusory image of Seetha, Vibhishana assures him of
Seetha being still alive and urges him to send Lakshmana with an army to the sanctuary of
Nikumbhila.

Chapter: 85
Vibhishana suggests Rama to send Lakshmana to kill Indrajit, even before Indrajit
completes the sacrificial fire in the sanctuary of Nikumbhila. Rama then asks Lakshmana to proceed
with the battle along with armies of Sugreeva, Hanuma, Jambavan and Vibhishana. Lakshmana proceeds
to Nikumbhila along with Hanuma, Vibhishana and Jambavan to kill Indrajit. Lakshmana accompanied by
Vibhishana, Angada and Hanuma penetrates that heterogeneous army of the enemies at the sanctuary of
Nikumbhila.

Chapter: 86
On the advice of Vibhishana, Lakshmana releases a multiple of arrows towards
Indrajit. A fight ensues between bears monkeys and demons. Hearing the terrible noise of the
battle, Indrajit discontinues his sacrificial rite and enters the battle-field. Hanuma with trees
as weapons, plays havoc among the demons and challenges Indrajit to a duel. Lakshmana catches sight
of Indrajit, coming in his chariot.

Chapter: 87
Vibhishana takes Lakshmana to the place where indrajit is performing the sacrificial
rite. He advises Lakshmana to destroy Indrajit even before he finishes the sacrificial rite at a
banyan tree. Indrajit sees Vibhishana there and starts talking harsh words to him, saying that he
has ditched him by bringing Lakshmana to that place. Vibhishana replies that because of Ravana's
vices, he has left him and joined Rama's side. He further adds that Indrajit and his army will not
survive under the range of Lakshmana's arrows.

Chapter: 88
A fierce battle of archery starts between Indrajit and Lakshmana. Indrajit strikes
Lakshmana with seven arrows, Hanuma with ten arrows and Vibhishana with a hundred arrows/almost at
the same time. In retaliation, Lakshmana strikes Indrajit with a multiple of arrows and Indrajit's
armour breaks up into pieces. Indrajit, in response, strikes Lakshmana with a thousand arrows and
breaks up Lakshmana's armour. A fierce fight ensues for a long time. Meanwhile, Vibhishana joins
the battle-field, to relieve Lakshmana's fatigue.

Chapter: 89
Vibhishana enters the battle-field and destroys many demons. He speaks encouraging
words to the chiefs of monkeys urging them to carry on the combat. The monkeys start a furious
attack on the demons. Even Hanuma begins to destroy thousands of demons. Indrajit rushes towards
Lakshmana and starts fighting with him. Lakshmana kills Indrajit's charioteer. Four excellent
monkey-chiefs kill Indrajit's horses and destroys his chariot.

Chapter: 90
Indrajit goes back to Lanka and brings another chariot with him. He attacks the
monkeys severely. The monkeys seek refuge in Lakshmana. Indrajit and Lakshmana continue a fierce
battle with their bow and arrows. Lakshmana destroys Indrajit's chariot. Indrajit strikes three
arrows in Lakshmana's forehead and Lakshmana strikes five arrows on Indrajit's face. When Indrajit
strikes Vibhishana with arrows, Vibhishana kills Indrajit's horses. Fitting a missile presided over
by Indra the lord of celestials, Lakshmana addressed a prayer on Rama and discharged it towards
Indrajit. Indrajit's head gets chopped off and falls to the ground. Witnessing Indrajit's death,
all the monkey-chiefs, Vibhishana, Hanuma and Jambavan applaud Lakshmana.

Chapter: 91
Lakshmana and Vibhishana approach Rama and inform him that Indrajit's head has been
chopped off. Rama was delighted with the news and applauds Lakshmana, by embracing him. Rama gets
Lakshmana and others treated by Sushena. After the medical treatment by Suhena, Lakshmana becomes
sound, active and full of joy.

Chapter: 92
Ravana feels distressed in hearing the news of his son's death. He gets enraged and
after deeply pondering over, decides to kill Seetha, who was the root of all this trouble. Ravana
with a sword in his hand, sallies forth towards Ashoka garden to make a short work of Seetha.
Seetha observes Ravana rushing towards her and laments that after killing Rama and Lakshmana, he is
coming to her place to kill her. Beholding the lamentation of Seetha, Suparshva, a good and upright
minister of Ravana advises Ravana to desist from that dastardly act and to divert his anger towards
Rama in battle. Ravana accepts the advice of his minister and returns to his assembly-hall.

Chapter: 93
As per Ravana's command, his army marches forward to the battle-field, so as to
fight fiercely with Rama and his army with their weapon. When the demons attack the monkeys with
their various weapons fiercely, they seek refuge in Rama. Rama destroys the troops of demons in the
battle-field swiftly.

Chapter: 94
The female-demons lament over the death of their husbands and kinsfolk in battle.
They further rebuke Surpanakha, for being the prime cause to bring Seetha to Lanka forcibly by
Ravana and for all the combat occurring with Rama thereafter. The female-demons feel sad that
Ravana did not heed to the appropriate advice given by Vibhishana. They further lament on
perceiving bad omens and predict the annihilation of Ravana. They recollect an instance of
celestials praying for Shiva and getting a boon that a woman (Seetha) will be born to cause the
destruction of demons.

Chapter: 95
On beholding the sight of female-demons, afflicted with grief in the houses of
Lanka, Ravana is very much enraged and orders his generals to tell their armies to set out for the
battle immediately. Ravana promises them to take revenge by killing Rama and Lakshmana as also
monkey-chiefs in the battle. Accompanied by several demon-warriors, Ravana marched to the
battle-field, where Rama and Lakshmana are while Ravana is sallying forth for the battle, he sees
several bad omens presaging his death. On hearing the noise of the demons entering the
battle-field, the army of monkeys return to the battle. A tumultuous fight ensues, between the
monkeys and the demons. Ravana fights fiercely with monkeys.

Chapter: 96
Having destroyed some monkeys in the battle-field, Ravana tries to approach Rama to
continue his fight. Meanwhile, Sugreeva along with some monkeys attack some chiefs of demons and
destroy them. Then, Virupaksha a demon comes and attacks Sugreeva. Sugreeva brings down a violent
slap on the temple-bone of Virupaksha and kills him.

Chapter: 97
Ravana sends Mahodara to the battle-field. Mahodara creates havoc, by cutting off
the hands, feet and thighs of monkeys. Some monkeys seek refuge with Sugreeva and some ran away for
life. Sugreeva attacks Mahodara and initially kills the horses of the latter. Both of them fight
till the weapons in their hands get broken. Then, they start wrestling with each other, till they
get exhausted. Finally, Sugreeva cuts off Mahodara's head with a huge sword.

Chapter: 98
When Mahaparshva enters the battle-field and torments the monkeys, Angada comes to
their rescue and hits him. Jambavan also enters the field and breaks the chariot and the horses of
Mahaparshva. Then, Angada knocks the bow and the helmet of Mahaparshva, as they fall down. Finally,
Mahaparshva falls dead, succumbing to a forcible blow of Angada's fist.

Chapter: 99
Ravana enters the battle-field and with his mystic missile, frightens several
monkeys and destroys them. Rama and Lakshmana come and attack Ravana. Then, Rama and Ravana fight
each other with various kinds of arrows. When the missile employed by Ravana is struck down by
Rama, all the monkeys shout loudly with a rejoice.

Chapter: 100
Rama and Ravana confront each other with various arrows and missiles. Meanwhile,
Lakshmana joins the fight and chops off Ravana's bow with his arrows. Vibhishana also fights and
kills Ravana's horses. Lakshmana rescues Vibhishana, when a spear is hurled on him by Ravana. Then,
Ravana throws a spear on Lakshmana. As it penetrates Lakshmana's bossom, Lakshmana falls down
unconscious. Rama hurls hails of arrows on Ravana from his flaming bow. Ravana takes to his heels
out of fear.

Chapter: 101
Rama laments over the uncertain condition of Lakshmana. He calls Sushena, the
monkey-physician. Sushena tests Lakshmana and says he is still alive. Sushena then requests Hanuma
to go all the way to Himalayas and bring the required herbs to treat Lakshmana. Hanuma proceeds to
Mount Mahodara and failing to identify the herbs there, carries the mountain-peak itself and brings
it to Sushena. Lakshmana regains consciousness, after getting treated with that herb by
Sushena.

Chapter: 102
The battle between Rama and Ravana starts. Indra sends a chariot, an armour, some
arrows and a powerful spear. A tumultuous and thrilling battle ensues between Rama and Ravana. A
spear hurled by Ravana is thwarted by a powerful spear (sent by Indra) of Rama. Then, Rama strikes
Ravana's horses with arrows. He also pierces the chest region and the forehead of Ravana with his
fierce arrows. Ravana gets severely hurt.

Chapter: 103
A ferocious battle ensues between Rama and Ravana, hurling thousands of arrows on
each other. Each one intercepts the other's arrows. Rama speaks harsh words to Ravana for having
carried away Seetha from Janasthana-forest to Lanka and vows that he will soon dispatch him surely
to the world of Death. Rama then pours down streams of arrows on Ravana. Rama more vehemently
torments Ravana with his sharp arrows and mystic missiles, till Ravana becomes helplessly weak and
confused. Ravana's charioteer carries away Ravana in the chariot, camly and slowly away from the
battle-front.

Chapter: 104
Ravana reproached the charioteer for having turned back his chariot away from the
battle-field. The charioteer explains to Ravana, the various reasons as to why he has taken back
the chariot. Satisfied with the explanation given by his charioteer, Ravana instructs him to take
the chariot back to the battle-field. Thereupon, the charioteer brings the chariot in an instant
before Rama on the battle-field.

Chapter: 105
Sage Agastya advises Rama to recites the 'Aditya Hridaya', a collection of verses in
praise of the sun-god, with a view to gaining victory.

Chapter: 106
Seeing Ravana's chariot coming, Rama asks Matali the charioteer to be on his guard.
Bad omens prognosticating the fall of Ravana and good omens predicting the victory of Rama appeared
in the scene of battle-field.

Chapter: 107
Loosing arrows at each other, Rama and Ravana perform a fierce battle. Ravana's
flag-staff is thrown down by Rama's arrows. When Rama begins to cut off Ravana's head, another head
starts to crop up in its place. The fierce encounter continues thus for seven days.

Chapter: 108
On the advice of Matali the charioteer, Rama employs on Ravana, a mystic missile
presided over by Brahma. That arrow penetrates Ravana's heart and kills him. Ravana falls down dead
from his chariot to the earth.

Chapter: 109
Vibhishana laments a lot, after seeing Ravana lying dead on the battle-field. Rama
comforts him, saying that a warrior killed in battle, need not be mourned. Vibhishana describes the
personality of Ravana and his qualities to Rama and seeks permission of Rama to perform funeral
rites to Ravana. Rama directs Vibhishana to perform the obsequies to Ravana, his deceased
brother.

Chapter: 110
All the consorts of Ravana lament, recollecting the valour of Ravana and with a
stunning surprise of how he has been killed by an ordinary mortal. They feel sorry that, had Seetha
been restored by Ravana to Rama, this major disaster would not have befallen them.

Chapter: 111
Mandodari stares at the dead body of Ravana and laments, recollecting the strength
and power of Ravana. But, she realizes that Rama, who killed Ravana, is none other than Vishnu the
lord of maintenance of the world. She further laments that Ravana has done a sinful deed in
abducting Seetha and that he has faced the consequence in the form of his death; in the hands of
Rama. She describes the charming personality and the unconquerable prowess of Ravana, but expresses
her surprise how he has been killed by a mortal like Rama. Mandodari's co-wives console her.
Meanwhile, Rama asks Vibhishana to perform obsequies to Ravana. Initially, Vibhishana refuses to
perform the last rites, but when Rama convinces him, he begins to perform the funeral of Ravana.
After the funeral is over, Vibhishana comes and joins Rama, who along with Lakshmana, Sugreeva and
others experience happiness for having destroyed their enemy.

Chapter: 112
Matali, Indra's charioteer leaves the battle-field and returns to his heaven. Then,
Rama instructs Lakshmana to arrange for the installation of Vibhishana on the throne of Lanka.
Lakshmana arranges to get sea-water from some monkey-chiefs and sprinkles it on vibhishana, to
instal him as the King of Lanka, in the presence of the demons there. Then, Rama sends his message
to Seetha through Hanuma.

Chapter: 113
Matali, Indra's charioteer leaves the battle-field and returns to his heaven. Then,
Rama instructs Lakshmana to arrange for the installation of Vibhishana on the throne of Lanka.
Lakshmana arranges to get sea-water from some monkey-chiefs and sprinkles it on Vibhishana, to
install him as the King of Lanka, in the presence of the demons there. Then, Rama sends his message
to Seetha through Hanuma.

Chapter: 114
Rama sends Vibhishana to bring Seetha to his presence. Vibhishana brings Seetha to
Rama's presence. Seetha casts her looks on the moon-like face of Rama, her beloved husband.

Chapter: 115
Rama informs Seetha that the dishonour meted out to him and the wrong done to her by
Ravana have been wiped off, by his victory over the enemy with the assistance of Hanuma, Sugreeva
and Vibhishana. However, regarding with suspicion the character of Seetha, Rama disowns her and
asks her to seek shelter elsewhere.

Chapter: 116
Seetha gives a taunting reply to Rama, saying that why she was not abandoned by the
latter, even at the time when Hanuma came to see her in Lanka. Then, Seetha requests Lakshmana to
prepare a pile of fire for her to enter. When Lakshmana prepares a pyre, Seetha prays the fire-god
and enters into it, in order toprove her conjugal fidelity.

Chapter: 117
Gods reach Lanka in aerial cars and approach Rama. They ask Rama why he ignores
Seetha, when she is entering into the fire. Rama appeals them to describe in reality who he is.
Brahma (the creator) proclaims his divinity and eulogizes him with hymns.

Chapter: 118
The fire-god appears in person from the burning pyre, carrying Seetha in his arms
and restores her to Rama, testifying to her purity. Rama later joyfully accepts her.

Chapter: 119
Lord Shiva informs Rama that his father, Dasaratha, in an ethereal form and as a
replica of his extinct personality, has arrived in an aerial car along with Indra, the lord of
celestials. Shiva asks Rama and Lakshmana to pay their respects to the soul of Dasaratha and they
respond in approaching him and offer their salutations. Dasaratha says he is overjoyed in seeing
him, having defeated Ravana and having completed the exile for fourteen years. He asks Rama to
return to Ayodhya, meet Bharata and get consecrated to the throne of Ayodhya. Dasaratha further
advises Lakshmana and Seetha to continue to serve Rama, the supreme deity. Dasaratha returns to the
abode of Indra, by the aerial car.

Chapter: 120
When Indra the lord of celestials asks Rama for a boon, Rama requested Indra to
bring back to life, all the monkeys who had lost their life in the battle. Indra grants the boon
and all the dead monkeys are restored to life. The celestials disperse and the whole army of
monkeys enjoy their well-earned rest.

Chapter: 121
Rama prepares to leave for Ayodhya. Even though Vibhishana requests Rama to remain
at Lanka for some more time and receive his hospitality, Rama gently refuses to do so, adding that
he needs to proceed to Ayodhya quickly, to see his mothers, brothers and people there. Vibhishana
arranges the aerial car, Pushpaka to transport Rama and others to Ayodhya.

Chapter: 122
Rama commands Vibhishana to honour the monkeys with gold and precious stones. When
Vibhishana has honoured them with the gifts, Rama along with Lakshmana and Seetha ascend the aerial
car. When the monkeys and Vibhishana request Rama to permit them to accompany in the aerial car
upto Ayodhya to witness his coronation-ceremony, Rama gladly permits them to do so. All of them
start on their aerial journey in Pushpaka, the wonderful aerial car which can accommodate all,
spaciously.

Chapter: 123
In the course of their flight to Ayodhya, Rama shows to Seetha, the whole City of
Lanka, the battle-field where Ravana and other demons were killed, Nala-Setu the bridge which was
built across the ocean, Mount Mainka, Setu-bandha (where the construction of the bridge was
started), Mount Rishyamuka, Pampa River, Janasthana-forest, Panchavati, Godavari river, the
hermitage of sage-Agastya, the hermitage of Atri and Anasuya, Mount Chitrakuta, Yamuna-river, the
hermitage of Bharadwaja, Ganga-river, Sarayu-river and finally the City of Ayodhya.

Chapter: 124
Rama, travelling in the aerial car towards Ayodhya, lands at the hermitage of
Bharadwaja the sage. When Rama enquires of Bhardwaja about the welfare of Ayodhya-City, Bharata and
his mothers. Bharadwaja informs Rama about their welfare. Further, the sage informs that by virtue
of his asceticism, he could know everything about the exploits of Rama from the day he left
Ayodhya, till he destroyed Ravana. Then, Rama seeks a boon from Bharadwaja, asking him to make the
trees on the route to Ayodhya, to bear fruit in the off-season for which the sage grants the boon.
Thereupon, the troops of monkeys feasted on those fruits at will.

Chapter: 125
Rama asks Hanuma to proceed to Shringaberapura and communicate to Guha about his
welfare and also to know the appropriate path to Ayodhya. Rama also asks Hanuma to go to Ayodhya
and communicate to Bharata about his welfare and also the previous happenings at the forest and at
Lanka, including the abduction of Seetha and her restoration, by killing Ravana in battle. Rama
also asks Hanuma to inform Bharata, about their arrival at the proximity of Ayodhya, along with
Sugreeva and Vibhishana. Accordingly, Hanuma approaches Guha and Bharata in Nandigrama and informs
the pleasant news about the welfare of Rama as well as his impending return to Ayodhya. Bharata is
overjoyed on hearing the glad tidings from Hanuma and offers him a number of valuable gifts, for
having communicated the agreeable news to him.

Chapter: 126
Hanuma recounts to Bharata, broad details relating to the soujourn of Rama, Seetha
and Lakshmana in the forest from the day Bharata takes wooden sandals of Rama, till the day Ravana
is killed.

Chapter: 127
Bharata, after hearing the good news from Hanuma about the arrival of Rama, calls
Shatrughna and commands him to make appropriate arrangements for the reception of Rama in the City
of Ayodhya. Bharata departs with all others, for Nandigrama to receive Rama. The aerial car lands
at Nandigrama. Bharata welcomes Rama and others, by embracing them and by greeting them joyously.
Rama too offers his salutations to all his mothers, who come to receive him. Then, Bharata brings
Rama's wooden sandals and places them below the feet of Rama. Rama commands Pushpaka, the aerial
car to return to Kubera, the lord of riches to whom it originally belonged.

Chapter: 128
At the request of Bharata to take back the kingdom of Ayodhya, Rama accepts the
offer and sits on a seat. Bharata and Rama take their bath and get adorned for the occasion. Rama,
mounting on an excellent chariot, sallies forth on a procession in the city accompanied by Bharata,
Shatrughna, Lakshmana and Vibhishana. Nine thousand elephants follow the procession, with Sugreeva
and other monkeys mounted on them. Some attendants and musicians with their musical instruments
walk in front of Rama's procession. The citizens of Ayodhya host flags on every house. Rama returns
to his paternal palace in Ayodhya. Sugreeva orders four of his monkeys to bring water from four
oceans in jars given to them. Some monkeys brought water from five hundred rivers, as also from the
four oceans for the purpose of the ceremony. Vasishta along with other brahmins as priests caused
Rama to be consecrated with that water. The virgins, ministers, warriors, merchants, the four gods
as well as other gods sprinkled sap of all kinds of herbs on Rama. Vasishta and other priests
officiating the coronation-ceremony adorned Rama with an auspicious and charming crown. Then, Rama
gives away presents to the priests as well as Sugreeva and Angada. Rama presents a pearl-necklace
to Seetha and Seetha presents that necklace in turn to Hanuma. Rama further gives away presents to
Vibhishana, Sugreeva, Jambavan and others on the occasion. Rama bids farewell to monkeys. The glory
of the epic is complemented in the end by Valmiki.
